add.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
add.o: add.c
add.o: add.h
add.o: emalloc.h
add.o: testcdf.h
atttests.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
atttests.o: add.h
atttests.o: atttests.c
atttests.o: emalloc.h
atttests.o: error.h
atttests.o: testcdf.h
atttests.o: tests.h
atttests.o: val.h
cdftests.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
cdftests.o: add.h
cdftests.o: cdftests.c
cdftests.o: emalloc.h
cdftests.o: error.h
cdftests.o: testcdf.h
cdftests.o: tests.h
dimtests.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
dimtests.o: add.h
dimtests.o: dimtests.c
dimtests.o: emalloc.h
dimtests.o: error.h
dimtests.o: testcdf.h
dimtests.o: tests.h
driver.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
driver.o: driver.c
driver.o: tests.h
emalloc.o: emalloc.c
emalloc.o: emalloc.h
emalloc.o: error.h
error.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
error.o: error.c
error.o: error.h
misctest.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
misctest.o: add.h
misctest.o: emalloc.h
misctest.o: error.h
misctest.o: misctest.c
misctest.o: testcdf.h
nctime.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
nctime.o: nctime.c
rec.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
rec.o: emalloc.h
rec.o: error.h
rec.o: rec.c
rec.o: testcdf.h
rec.o: tests.h
rec.o: val.h
slabs.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
slabs.o: add.h
slabs.o: emalloc.h
slabs.o: error.h
slabs.o: slabs.c
slabs.o: testcdf.h
slabs.o: tests.h
val.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
val.o: emalloc.h
val.o: error.h
val.o: testcdf.h
val.o: val.c
val.o: val.h
vardef.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
vardef.o: add.h
vardef.o: emalloc.h
vardef.o: error.h
vardef.o: testcdf.h
vardef.o: tests.h
vardef.o: vardef.c
varget.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
varget.o: emalloc.h
varget.o: error.h
varget.o: testcdf.h
varget.o: tests.h
varget.o: varget.c
vargetg.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
vargetg.o: emalloc.h
vargetg.o: error.h
vargetg.o: testcdf.h
vargetg.o: tests.h
vargetg.o: vargetg.c
varput.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
varput.o: emalloc.h
varput.o: error.h
varput.o: testcdf.h
varput.o: tests.h
varput.o: val.h
varput.o: varput.c
varputg.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
varputg.o: emalloc.h
varputg.o: error.h
varputg.o: testcdf.h
varputg.o: tests.h
varputg.o: val.h
varputg.o: varputg.c
vartests.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
vartests.o: add.h
vartests.o: emalloc.h
vartests.o: error.h
vartests.o: testcdf.h
vartests.o: tests.h
vartests.o: vartests.c
vputget.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
vputget.o: add.h
vputget.o: emalloc.h
vputget.o: error.h
vputget.o: testcdf.h
vputget.o: tests.h
vputget.o: val.h
vputget.o: vputget.c
vputgetg.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
vputgetg.o: add.h
vputgetg.o: emalloc.h
vputgetg.o: error.h
vputgetg.o: testcdf.h
vputgetg.o: tests.h
vputgetg.o: val.h
vputgetg.o: vputgetg.c
