
.. _DealingWithGrads:

************************************************
**1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++: dealing with DW gradients**
************************************************

.. contents::
   :depth: 3

Overview
========

In diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), magnetic field gradients are
applied along various spatial directions to probe relative diffusivity
along different orientations. In order to estimate the diffusion
tensor (DT), we need to have a recording of what was the
directionality of each gradient (**g**, a vector of unit length), and
what was the strength of the extra magnetic field (*b*, a scalar) was
used.

Many different programs and software, starting from the MRI machines
themselves, use different notations and methods of reading and writing
the gradient direction and strength information. Drat. Therefore,
there is some need for manipulating them during the analysis process
(sometimes even iteratively to make sure that everything matches).

Since each gradient and *b*\-value have a one-to-one correspondence
with an acquired DWI volume, we would also like to keep the processing
of any one type of data in line with the others.  For example, common
DWI processing includes averaging the *b*\=0 reference images
together, and possibly averaging repetitions of sets of DWIs together
(in both cases, to have higher SNR of individual datasets)-- programs
discussed here allow one to semi-automate these averaging processes
(as well as check that averaging is really feasible) while
appropriately updating gradient information.

.. note:: Below, when referring to DW factors, the assumed units of
          the *b*\-values are always: :math:`{\rm s~mm}^{-2}` (unless
          otherwise stated.

|

Diffusion gradients
-------------------

The spatial orientations of the applied diffusion weighting gradients
are typically recorded as unit normal vectors, which can be expressed
as (equivalently, just with different notations):

.. math::
   \mathbf{g} &= (g_x, g_y, g_z),~{\rm or}\\
              &= (g_1, g_2, g_3), 

where :math:`g_x^2 + g_y^2 + g_z^2\equiv1` for DWIs, and :math:`g_x =
g_y = g_z = 0` for the *b*\=0 reference images. For example, a
diffusion gradient applied entirely in the from 'top' to 'bottom' in
the *z*\-direction (of whatever set of axes the scanner is using)
might be expressed as (0, 0, 1), and one purely in the *xy*\-plane
could be (0.707, -0.707, 0) or (-0.950, -0.436, 0), etc. 

.. note:: Sometimes the 'reference' images aren't *exactly* totally
          unweighed with *b*\=0. Some data acquisition protocols use a
          magnetic field gradient with a small DW factor, such as
          *b*\=5, as a reference volume.  Such data can be processed
          here, one just needs to include the *b* value information
          explicitly and specify below what DW factor are reference
          values.

The gradient information is often saved in a text file as three rows
of numbers (for example, the ``*.bvecs`` files created by
``dcm2niix``) or as three columns.  If the acquisition contained *N*
reference (*b*\=0) images and *M* DWIs, then these initial files
typically have dimensionality :math:`3\times(N+M)` or
:math:`(N+M)\times3`, respectively.  Additionally, a separate file
may contain the list of DW factors (i.e., the *b*\-values), and there
would be :math:`N+M` in a single row or column.

Diffusion matrices
------------------

The directionality diffusion gradients may also be encoded as a
:math:`3\times3` matrix:

.. math::
   \mathbf{G}= 
   \left[\begin{array}{ccc}
   G_{xx}&G_{xy}&G_{xz}\\
   G_{yx}&G_{yy}&G_{yz}\\
   G_{zx}&G_{zy}&G_{zz}
   \end{array}\right],~~~{\rm or}~~~
   \left[\begin{array}{ccc}
   G_{11}&G_{12}&G_{13}\\
   G_{21}&G_{22}&G_{23}\\
   G_{31}&G_{32}&G_{33}
   \end{array}\right].

The components of the matrix are related to the gradients above:
:math:`G_{xy}\equiv g_x g_y`, :math:`G_{12}\equiv g_1 g_2`,
etc. Formally, **G** is the outer (or dyadic) product of **g**. Here,
the main thing that results from this relation is that **G** is
symmetric (:math:`G_{xy}\equiv G_{yx}`), which means that there are
only six independent components in the :math:`3\times3` matrix.  Thus,
six numbers are recorded in this format. Generally, these are stored
as columns, so that the files would be (following the previous
section's notation) an :math:`(N+M)\times6` array of numbers.

*However, there is the little wrinkle that different programs write
out the components in different ways!*

The standard style for inputting into AFNI functions is 'diagonal
first' *g*-matrix:

.. math::
   G_{xx}~~~ G_{yy}~~~ G_{zz}~~~ G_{xy}~~~ G_{xz}~~~ G_{yz}\,,

while, for example, another output style is 'row first' *g*-matrix
(and it may often explicitly include the factors of two from the
symmetry of the off-diagonals):

.. math::
   G_{xx}~~~2\,G_{xy}~~~2\,G_{xz}~~~G_{yy}~~~2\,G_{yz}~~~G_{zz}\,.

Each of these formats record equivalent information, so it's just a
matter of using the appropriate one with the appropriate software.
When using these dyadic *g*-matrices to record spatial information,
the *b*\-value information sits by itself again, similar as with the
**g** vector gradients.

As a final case, one may include the magnitude of the magnetic fields
with the spatial directionality in a single expression, the
*b*\-matrix:

.. math::
   \mathbf{B}= b \mathbf{G},

where every component of the above dyadic matrix, **G**, is simply
multiplied by the DW factor, *b*.  All the other notations, symmetries
and relations for the *b*\-matrices remain the same as for the
*g*\-matrices, including the distinctions in row- or diagonal-first
notations.  

Of note, TORTOISE functions typically use and output a *row-first*
*b*\-matrix (with the factors of 2, as above).  

.. note:: In some versions of TORTOISE v2.*, there is an 'AFNI_SAVE'
          option that can be used when exporting the *b*\-matrix; in
          this case, the output matrix is *diagonal-first*, such as
          would be called "AFNI-style" above.  **However**, this issue
          is further complicated by the fact that some versions of
          TORTOISE had the factor of 2 included, which AFNI typically
          does not use...  This is actually easily managed because the
          conversion from matrix-to-vector is not affected by that
          factor of two (in an interesting algebraic quirk, only the
          sign information comes from the off-diagonal elements for
          this operation); so one could convert the TORTOISE matrix to
          a vector and then to an AFNI style matrix in such cases.

          TORTOISE v3.* does not appear to have these options as yet;
          we only deal with and convert the TORTOISE-style matrices.

The following figure shows a comparison of the same few lines of *b*\-
and *g*\- matrix and vector formats:

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 64 40
   :stub-columns: 0

   *  - Grad/matrix selection
      - Style description
   *  - .. image:: media/dwi_gvec_row.png
           :width: 100%
      - **(row, unit-magnitude) gradient file**; note the arrows on
        the edge signifying that each line is actually wrapped over
        many rows of the text editor
   *  - .. image:: media/dwi_bval_row.png
           :width: 100%
      - **(row) b-value file**; the single line is wrapped around to
        many rows in the text editor
   *  - .. image:: media/dwi_bval.png
           :width: 100%
      - **(column) b-value file**  
   *  - .. image:: media/dwi_gvec.png
           :width: 100%
      - **(column, unit-magnitude) gradient file**
   *  - .. image:: media/dwi_bvec.png
           :width: 100%
      - **(column, DW-scaled) gradient file**
   *  - .. image:: media/dwi_bmatT.png
           :width: 100%
      - **row-first (TORTOISE-style) b-matrix**; the three columns
        with no negative values contain the diagonal elements of the
        matrix; this has a different order and a factor of 2 scaling
        the off-diagonal elements, compared to the 'AFNI-style'.
   *  - .. image:: media/dwi_bmatA.png
           :width: 100%
      - **diagonal-first (AFNI-style) b-matrix**; the three columns
        with no negative values contain the diagonal elements of the
        matrix.
   *  - .. image:: media/dwi_gmatA.png
           :width: 100%
      - **row-first (AFNI-style) g-matrix**

Note that in the 'diagonal-first' matrix case, the first three columns
contain only non-negative (:math:`\geq0`) numbers. This will always be the
case, since the *b*\- or *g*\-matrix is positive definite, and this
property provides a solid hint as to the style of a given matrix
output.  (Columns of off-diagonal elements may or may not contain
negatives). In the 'row-first' cases columns 0, 2 and 5 contain the
matrix diagonals.  The factors of two in the columns representing
off-diagonal matrix elements is apparent when comparing the
*b*\-matrices. Finally, one can see how the *b*\=1000 information
translates into the *b*\-matrix file by comparing the last two rows.

.. note:: This is discussed more below, but current recommendations
          for using AFNI DT-calculating functions (e.g., ``3dDWItoDT``
          and ``3dDWUncert``) is to make AFNI-style *b*\-matrices.  

          1. We like the *b*\-matrix format because we can use all of
             the rows when inputting into ``3dDWItoDT`` or
             ``3dDWUncert`` with the ``-bmatrix_FULL *`` option;
             gradient vector-based options would want one less row,
             just assuming that the 0th volume in the set is *b*\=0,
             which might not be the case.

          2. We like having DW scaling in the matrix info (the
             *b*\value), so that we preserve real physical units in
             the tensor estimates. When using ``3dDWItoDT`` or
             ``3dDWUncert``, one should probably also use the
             ``-scale_out_1000`` switch to have nice numbers, which
             are then interpreted as :math:`10^{-3}~{\rm s~mm}^{-2}`
             instead of the default :math:`{\rm s~mm}^{-2}`; thus, the
             number part for average healthy adult parenchyma would be
             "0.7" (in units of :math:`10^{-3}~{\rm s~mm}^{-2}`)
             rather than "0.0007" (in units of :math:`{\rm
             s~mm}^{-2}`), which might be more annoying for
             bookkeeping/calculations.

Operations
==========

Note the name of the function, ``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++``, which is now the
recommended processor for gradient/matrix things in AFNI.  It
supercedes the older, clunkier ``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat``.  The newer
``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++`` has clearer syntax, better defaults and promotes
world peace (in its own small way).

Gradient and matrix information
-------------------------------

#.  The relevant formats described above can be converted among each other
    using ``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++``. The formats of inputs and outputs are
    described by the option used, as follows:

    .. list-table:: 
       :header-rows: 1
       :widths: 30 30 40
       :stub-columns: 0

       *  - input/option
          - style description
          - example program
       *  - -{in,out}_row_vec
          - row gradients
          - ``dcm2niix`` output, ``TORTOISE`` input
       *  - -{in,out}_col_vec
          - column gradients
          - basic input to ``3dDWItoDT`` (not preferred one, tho')
       *  - -{in,out}_col_matA
          - row-first *g*\- or *b*\-matrices (user can choose scaling)
          - alt. input to ``3dDWItoDT`` (preferred!); (some, maybe)
            ``TORTOISE`` output
       *  - -{in,out}_col_matT
          - diagonal-first *g*\- or *b*\-matrices
          - (some/typical) ``TORTOISE`` output

|

#.  Additionally, the file of *b*\-values may be input after the
    ``-in_bvals *`` option.  This might be requisite if converting
    gradients to *b*\-matrices, for instance (but be sure not to scale
    up an already-scaled set of vectors/matrices!).  One can input
    either a row- or column-oriented file here; ``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++``
    will know what to do with either one (because it will be
    1-by-something or something-by-1).  When outputting a separate
    file of *b*\-values, one *does* have to specify either row or
    column, using: ``-out_row_bval_sep *`` or ``-out_col_bval_sep *``,
    respectively.

    The *b*\-values can also be used to define which associated
    gradient/matrix entries refer to reference images and which to
    DWIs; if not input, the program will estimate this based on the
    magnitudes of the gradients-- those with essentially zero
    magnitude are treated as reference markers, and the rest are
    treated as DWI markers.  *In general now, the distinction between
    reference and DW-scaled gradients is not very important: we no
    longer average reference volumes by default, and it probably
    shouldn't be done.*

#.  In rare cases, one might want to include a column of *b*\-values
    in the output gradient/matrix file. One example of this is with
    DSI-Studio for HARDI fitting.  One can enact this behavior using
    the ``-out_col_bval`` switch.  The first column of the text file
    will contain the *b*\-values (assuming you either input
    *b*\-matrices or used ``-in_bvals *``). This option only applies
    to columnar output.
   
#.  In contrast to the older ``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat``, the newer
    ``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat`` does **not** try to average *b*\=0 files or to
    remove the top row of reference volumes from the top of the
    gradient/matrix files.  Nowadays, if one inputs a file with *N*
    reference and *M* DW images, the output would have the
    gradients/matrices of all :math:`N+M`.  One major reason for
    preferring using the AFNI-style *b*\-matrix as the format of
    choice is because the full set of :math:`N+M` values are used via
    the ``-bmatrix_FULL *`` option in ``3dDWItoDT``, ``3dDWUncert``,
    etc. (as opposed to :math:`N+M-1` ones if using grads or a
    difference *b*\-matrix option, for historical reasons).
    
.. _GradOpsWithImages:

Simultaneous averaging of datasets
----------------------------------

**This is not performed in ``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat``.  We no longer
recommend doing this, based on the way tensor fitting is peformed.**

.. _FlippingGrads:

How to check about gradient flipping?
-------------------------------------

The discussion of this specific topic has been moved to its own page,
:ref:``GradFlipTest``.  Please see there for the mathematical
description of gradient flipping and tractographic images of its
consequences, as well as the best way to investigate the phenomenon.

(The short answer is, "Use ``@GradFlipTest``.")


Example ``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat`` commands
------------------------------------

Consider a case where ``dcm2niix`` has been used to convert data from
a DWI acquisition, resulting in: a NIFTI file called ``ALL.nii.gz``; a
row gradient file called ``ALL.bvec`` (unweighted, unit magnitudes);
and a (row) *b*\-value file called ``ALL.bval``.  Let's say that the
acquisition aquired: 4 *b*\=0 reference images; then 30 DW images with
*b*\=1000. Then:

#. The following produces a gradient file with 3 columns and 34
   rows (unscaled, gradient vectors)::

     1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++                         \
        -in_row_vec   ALL.bvec                 \
        -out_col_vec  dwi_bvec.dat  

#. The following flips the y-component of the input DW gradients
   and produces a row-first *b*\-matrix (i.e., elements scaled by
   DW value) file with 6 columns and 34 rows::

     1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++                         \
        -in_row_vec   ALL.bvec                 \
        -in_bvals     ALL.bval                 \
        -out_col_matA dwi_matA.dat  
        -flip_y

#. An example of including ``@GradFlipTest``\'s guess at an
   appropriate gradient flip in a pipeline with ``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++``
   is provided in ":ref:`gradflip_plus_gradomat`".  

   *But be sure to also read* ":ref:`gradfliptest_caveat`" in order to
   appreciate the importance of still checking ``@GradFlipTest``
   results by eye yourself (-> something that the function's output
   assists with, anyways).

#. Sometimes, to deal with odd sequence protocol necessities, a
   single DW scaling is stored for each *b*\-value and the
   gradients themselves are scaled to less than unity to reflect
   having a lower, applied weighting.  Weird.  But we can deal
   with this-- the following example would combine the *b*\-values
   and gradients, and then output gradient-magnitude (column)
   vector grads and the effective *b*\-values separately::

     1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++                         \
        -in_row_vec   ALL.bvec                 \
        -in_bvals     ALL.bval                 \
        -out_col_vec  dwi_gvec.dat             \
        -out_col_bval_sep dwi_bval.dat         \
        -unit_mag_out

#. The following first selects only some of the gradient and
   associated *b*\-values (for example, if motion had occured).
   Of the original 34 volumes, this would select :math:`4+1+22=27`
   gradients, and similar subbrick selection would have to be
   applied to the set of DWI volumes::

     1dDW_Grad_o_Mat                           \
        -in_row_vec   ALL.bvec'[0..3,8,12..$]' \
        -in_bvals     ALL.bval'[0..3,8,12..$]' \
        -out_col_matA dwi_matA_sel.dat 

     3dcalc                                    \
        -a ALL.nii'[0..3,8,12..$]'             \
        -expr 'a'                              \
        -prefix ALL_sel.nii

   .. note:: Subset selection works similarly as in other AFNI
             programs, both for datasets and the row/column
             files. For row text files, one uses square-brackets
             '[*A*..\ *B*\]' to select the gradients *A* to
             *B*. For column text files, one would do the same
             using curly brackets '{*A*..\ *B*}'.
