fort-attio.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-attio.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-attio.o: cfortran.h
fort-attio.o: cfortran.h
fort-attio.o: fort-attio.c
fort-attio.o: fort-attio.c
fort-attio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-attio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-attio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-attio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-attio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-control.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-control.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-control.o: cfortran.h
fort-control.o: cfortran.h
fort-control.o: fort-control.c
fort-control.o: fort-control.c
fort-control.o: ncfortran.h
fort-control.o: ncfortran.h
fort-control.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-dim.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-dim.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-dim.o: cfortran.h
fort-dim.o: cfortran.h
fort-dim.o: fort-dim.c
fort-dim.o: fort-dim.c
fort-dim.o: ncfortran.h
fort-dim.o: ncfortran.h
fort-dim.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-genatt.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-genatt.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-genatt.o: cfortran.h
fort-genatt.o: cfortran.h
fort-genatt.o: fort-genatt.c
fort-genatt.o: fort-genatt.c
fort-genatt.o: ncfortran.h
fort-genatt.o: ncfortran.h
fort-genatt.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-geninq.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-geninq.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-geninq.o: cfortran.h
fort-geninq.o: cfortran.h
fort-geninq.o: fort-geninq.c
fort-geninq.o: fort-geninq.c
fort-geninq.o: ncfortran.h
fort-geninq.o: ncfortran.h
fort-geninq.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-genvar.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-genvar.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-genvar.o: cfortran.h
fort-genvar.o: cfortran.h
fort-genvar.o: fort-genvar.c
fort-genvar.o: fort-genvar.c
fort-genvar.o: fort-lib.h
fort-genvar.o: fort-lib.h
fort-genvar.o: ncfortran.h
fort-genvar.o: ncfortran.h
fort-genvar.o: ncfortran.h
fort-genvar.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-lib.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-lib.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-lib.o: cfortran.h
fort-lib.o: fort-lib.c
fort-lib.o: fort-lib.c
fort-lib.o: fort-lib.h
fort-lib.o: fort-lib.h
fort-lib.o: ncfortran.h
fort-lib.o: ncfortran.h
fort-lib.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-misc.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-misc.o: cfortran.h
fort-misc.o: cfortran.h
fort-misc.o: fort-misc.c
fort-misc.o: fort-misc.c
fort-misc.o: ncfortran.h
fort-misc.o: ncfortran.h
fort-misc.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-v2compat.o: ../libsrc/ncconfig.h
fort-v2compat.o: ../libsrc/ncconfig.h
fort-v2compat.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-v2compat.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-v2compat.o: cfortran.h
fort-v2compat.o: cfortran.h
fort-v2compat.o: fort-lib.h
fort-v2compat.o: fort-lib.h
fort-v2compat.o: fort-v2compat.c
fort-v2compat.o: fort-v2compat.c
fort-v2compat.o: ncfortran.h
fort-v2compat.o: ncfortran.h
fort-v2compat.o: ncfortran.h
fort-v2compat.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-v2compat.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-v2compat.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-var1io.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-var1io.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-var1io.o: cfortran.h
fort-var1io.o: cfortran.h
fort-var1io.o: fort-lib.h
fort-var1io.o: fort-lib.h
fort-var1io.o: fort-var1io.c
fort-var1io.o: fort-var1io.c
fort-var1io.o: ncfortran.h
fort-var1io.o: ncfortran.h
fort-var1io.o: ncfortran.h
fort-var1io.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-var1io.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-var1io.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-varaio.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-varaio.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-varaio.o: cfortran.h
fort-varaio.o: cfortran.h
fort-varaio.o: fort-lib.h
fort-varaio.o: fort-lib.h
fort-varaio.o: fort-varaio.c
fort-varaio.o: fort-varaio.c
fort-varaio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-varaio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-varaio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-varaio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-varaio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-varaio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-vario.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-vario.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-vario.o: cfortran.h
fort-vario.o: cfortran.h
fort-vario.o: fort-lib.h
fort-vario.o: fort-lib.h
fort-vario.o: fort-vario.c
fort-vario.o: fort-vario.c
fort-vario.o: ncfortran.h
fort-vario.o: ncfortran.h
fort-vario.o: ncfortran.h
fort-vario.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-vario.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-vario.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-varmio.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-varmio.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-varmio.o: cfortran.h
fort-varmio.o: cfortran.h
fort-varmio.o: fort-lib.h
fort-varmio.o: fort-lib.h
fort-varmio.o: fort-varmio.c
fort-varmio.o: fort-varmio.c
fort-varmio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-varmio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-varmio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-varmio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-varmio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-varmio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-varsio.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-varsio.o: ../libsrc/netcdf.h
fort-varsio.o: cfortran.h
fort-varsio.o: cfortran.h
fort-varsio.o: fort-lib.h
fort-varsio.o: fort-lib.h
fort-varsio.o: fort-varsio.c
fort-varsio.o: fort-varsio.c
fort-varsio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-varsio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-varsio.o: ncfortran.h
fort-varsio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-varsio.o: nfconfig.inc
fort-varsio.o: nfconfig.inc
ftest.o: ftest.F
ftest.o: netcdf.inc
ftest.o: nfconfig.inc
imap.o: imap.F
imap.o: netcdf.inc
