.. _FATPREP_overview:

Background and additional software
==================================

.. contents::
   :depth: 3


Overview
--------

**[July 2017]** Revamping, and most scripts are in the distribution,
 still finishing the documentation at the moment...

This page provides a preliminary description of using AFNI+FATCAT
tools to develop a flexible pipeline for the processing and analysis
of diffusion-based images.  We describe the available tools and give
example commands for real sets of data that have been acquired in
various ways.

Importantly, these functions combine and are designed to integrate
smoothly with existing processing tools.  This includes `TORTOISE
<https://science.nichd.nih.gov/confluence/display/nihpd/TORTOISE>`_
for processing diffusion weighted (DW) MRI data.  It also uses
``dcm2niix`` from `mricron
<http://people.cas.sc.edu/rorden/mricron/dcm2nii.html>`_ (though,
conveniently, this is now distributed within AFNI itself, as
``dcm2niix_afni``-- thanks, C Rorden!) for converting DICOM files to
NIFTI format.  Additionally, we describe incorporating `FreeSurfer
<https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/>`_ into the processing, as one
way of making meaningful GM targets from the subject's own data.

.. note:: TORTOISE has changed quite a lot lately (early-mid 2017),
          and we now just describe using tools in TORTOISE v3.* (or
          potentially later, as time rolls on inexorably).  This is
          version is command line processable, and has several new
          features relative to v2.* and earlier.  

          For now, we do still provide the earlier PDF for how we run
          straightforward processing in TORTOISE v2.5.2, for those in
          the midst of processing older data still.  However, we
          strongly recommend using the more recent versions described.

While there is no single way to break up levels of a processing
pipeline, the major stages can be described as follows:

* **Pre-preprocessing.** First, we discuss converting DW and
  anatomical data sets from DICOM format, organizing them, preparing
  the anatomical as a reference volume (and also for segmentation),
  visually checking the DWIs and removing bad volumes/gradients.

* **Preprocessing.** We then provide a brief set of steps for using
  the TORTOISE GUI to process your DWI data. Note, we don't maintain
  the TORTOISE tools, we just use them a lot; please consult with the
  real `TORTOISE
  <https://science.nichd.nih.gov/confluence/display/nihpd/TORTOISE>`_
  gurus for processing, and take everything here with a grain of
  salt. We describe some default usages, but special cases (infant,
  pediatric, non-typical brain structure, non-human brains, etc.)
  should *really* involve the TORTOISE gurus.  We also describe
  running FreeSurfer and converting volumes to AFNI/SUMA format.

* **Post-preprocessing.** We then show simple steps for tensor fitting
  and parameter estimation, as well as basic whole brain tracking for
  quality control.  We even discuss some further processing, for
  example integrating with FreeSurfer (and maybe eventually FMRI data,
  or other things...), but the branching points for analysis become
  pretty numerous pretty quickly.

It is pretty difficult to come up with one unwavering pipeline for
this preprocessing, particularly as people have very different
data. For example, were the DWIs acquired using a single phase encode
direction, or a pair of oppositely phase encoded (AP-PA,
blip-up/blip-down data)?  Scans of squirmy kids, or meditating adults?
Is there a T2w anatomical, or only a T1w volume?  Therefore, we
describe a possible sequence of tools, but mention that not all would
be necessary (or even appropriate, in some cases) in every single
pipeline.  The user will be required to do some decision making.

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 100

   * - A schematic pipeline for some of the main ``fat_proc``
       functions, as well as how they might incorporate with other
       tools
   * - .. image:: media/fat_proc_3prong_pipeline.png
          :width: 90%
          :align: center
   * -

These scripts are examples, not dogma-- they are **a** way to go about
DWI processing with AFNI, FATCAT and TORTOISE (as well as FreeSurfer
and ``dcm2niix``). They are bound to change (improve?) over
time. Additional options can happily be added if they simplify your
life and don't overly complicate mine.  And please let me know if you
have any problems, via posting on the `Message Board
<https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni/community/board>`_ or emailing.

*Much of this work was started at the* `University of Cape Town
<http://www.bme.uct.ac.za/bme/researchgrouping-mri>`_, *SA-- thanks
Jia Fan, Marcin Jankiewicz and Ernesta Meintjes for facilitating and
providing useful feedback with many of these scripts.  Additionally,
thanks Bharath Holla at* `NIMHANS <http://www.nimhans.ac.in/>`_ *in
Bangalore, India, who also ran beta versions and gave very helpful
suggestions.*


TORTOISE and DWIs
-----------------

Diffusion weighted MRI data can be greatly affected by a large number
of artifacts.  The most (in)famous are probably subject motion, eddy
current distortion and EPI distortion (B0 inhomogeneity).  Trickiness
in dealing with their effects is compounded by the fact that their
distortions *themselves* are compounded and can't really be separated.
Trying to manage them is serious business, and a combination of
thoughtful study design and careful data acquisition is as important
(if not more so) than any computational processing afterwards.

`TORTOISE (Pierpaoli et al., 2010)
<https://science.nichd.nih.gov/confluence/display/nihpd/TORTOISE>`_ is
a very effective retrospective processing tool for acquired DWIs, and
it is publicly available from the NIH.  As noted on their `webpage
<https://science.nichd.nih.gov/confluence/display/nihpd/TORTOISE>`_,
there are two main tools in TORTOISE for corrective preprocessing of
diffusion data:

    * ``DIFFPREP`` - software for image resampling, motion, eddy
      current distortion, and some EPI distortion correction using a
      structural image as target, and for re-orientation of data to a
      common space.

    * ``DR_BUDDI`` - software for EPI distortion correction using
      pairs of diffusion data sets acquired with opposite phase
      encoding (blip-up blip-down acquisitions), also using a
      structural image as a target.

By default, these functions use an anatomical reference for distortion
correction/unwarping, and it is strongly recommended to have one when
using TORTOISE. The anatomical data set should match the contrast of a
subject's *b*\ =0 DWI volume, which generally means having a
T2-weighted (T2w) volume; the application of a T1w volume as a
reference if a T2w one is not available is discussed below. Finally,
we note that TORTOISE includes the DIFF_CALC module for tensor
fitting, visualization and other features, but here it is only used
for exporting ``DIFFPREP`` or ``DR_BUDDI`` results.  

As also noted on their webpage, it is not a speedy program-- though it
has gotten much faster in v3.* (having migrated from IDL to
C++). Speed of processing depends a lot on the data, with higher
spatial resolution, larger numbers of volumes/gradients and greater
upsampling adding to time.  It might take around an hour to
``DIFFPREP`` a standard research data set (~30 grads, 2 mm isotropic
data), and probably a couple hours then for ``DR_BUDDI``

*Many thanks to Okan Irfanoglu, Amritha Nayak, Carlo Pierpaoli and the
rest of the TORTOISE crew for constructive comments, suggestions and
contributions to these notes and scripts.*

DICOMs and dcm2niix(_afni)
--------------------------

DICOM conversion requires reading the data header, parsing it for
desired information (i.e., how many volumes, what order, voxel
dimensions, etc.), and putting it all into a usable format such as
NIFTI plus supplementary text files.  Many things in the DICOM world
aren't standardized, vendors do things independently (and change their
own inner workings from time to time), and tailored sequences might
contain additional wrinkles.  Basically, it's a hard task.

There's a fair number of DICOM converters out there and even some "in
here" in AFNI (e.g., ``to3d``, ``Dimon``).  I use ``dcm2niix_afni``
for conversion because: it is free (and now even distributed as part
of AFNI!); I have used it for a long time; it requires minimal user
input; and I've generally found it to be reliable-- that is, most
converted volumes (appear to) have correctly translated data and
header information.  However, there are no guarantees in life, and the
user will be expected to look over her/his own data for sanity
checking everything. 

Previously, the TORTOISE folks have typically recommended reading in
DICOM files to TORTOISE directly.  This is because they have managed
their own set of DICOM-readers and felt that they stay up-to-date with
vendor changes and it is therefore the most stable way to go.  As of
TOROISE v3.1, however, I believe they also now implement dcm2niix for
most cases, so this difference is also much reduced.  The choice of
whether to convert or not before TORTOISEing is still yours, though,
dear user.  Note that for special kinds of acquisitions (e.g., those
made with: oblique acquisitions, home-cooked sequences, some scanner
vendors, image gradients wrapped in with the diffusion gradients,
etc.), extra care must be taken and talking with the TORTOISE folks
directly is recommended.  I *do* like to convert DICOMS to NIFTI so
that I can view the data and kick out bad volumes pre-TORTOISEing, and
I haven't had the misfortune to have major formatting trouble whilst
doing so (*he writes asking The Universe for trouble*...).

.. note:: When converting DICOMs, it seems like one has to be *extra*
          vigilant when converting data acquired on Philips scanners.
          This is not to pick on anybody, but there have been many
          times when reading header information properly has been
          challenging.  Looking at data, and testing it to make sure
          it has the properties you expect, is always a Good Thing.

We try to maintain fairly recent copies of ``dcm2niix`` in AFNI.  Any
deep questions on converting DICOMs with this tool should be directed
to C. Rorden et al., though we are happy to learn of
updates/fixes/etc.

.. _suppl_refsets_mni:

Supplementary/reference data sets
---------------------------------

For the purposes of axialization, it is necessary to have a reference
volume that has desired orientation within a FOV.  In this example we
are looking at an adult human dset, which includes a T2w volume for
reference within TORTOISE processing. Therefore, we want to have a
reference volume with T2w contrast.  

We started by downloading the `"ICBM 2009a Nonlinear Symmetric"
atlases
<www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/~vfonov/icbm/2009/mni_icbm152_nlin_sym_09a_nifti.zip>`_
freely available for download from the `BIC folks at MNI
<http://www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/ServicesAtlases/ICBM152NLin2009>`_.  One
volume was manually AC-PC aligned by an expert using MIPAV, and the
other volumes were registered to it. (During this process, the FOV of
the data was altered-- the resulting volume has an even number of
slices in all directions.)  The volumes were masked to remove the
skull.  Finally, a subcortical weight mask version of each volume was
also made by weighting (values :math:`\times5`) a blurred ellipsoid
covering much of the subcortical brain; using this mask would weight
the global brain alignment by this part of the brain, with the idea
that the final result of axialization might be closer to what AC-PC
alignment would provide.  This was done for the T2w and T1w volumes in
the MNI set, which are shown below.

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50

   * - T2w reference volume
     - T2w (subcortical) weight mask 
   * - mni_icbm152_t2_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE.\*
     - mni_icbm152_t2_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE_wtell.\*
   * - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t2_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t2_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE_wtell.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t2_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE.cor.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t2_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE_wtell.cor.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t2_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t2_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE_wtell.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - *T2w volume (originally from MNI ICBM 2009a Nonlinear Symmetric
       atlas) used as a reference for axialization.*
     - *The subcortical weight mask of the T2w reference volume,
       emphasizing the subcortical region.*

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50

   * - T1w reference volume
     - T1w (subcortical) weight mask
   * - mni_icbm152_t1_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE.\*
     - mni_icbm152_t1_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE_wtell.\*
   * - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t1_tal_nlin_sym_09a_MSKD_ACPCE.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t1_tal_nlin_sym_09a_MSKD_ACPCE_wtell.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t1_tal_nlin_sym_09a_MSKD_ACPCE.cor.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t1_tal_nlin_sym_09a_MSKD_ACPCE_wtell.cor.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t1_tal_nlin_sym_09a_MSKD_ACPCE.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/IMG_mni_icbm152_t1_tal_nlin_sym_09a_MSKD_ACPCE_wtell.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - *T1w volume (originally from MNI ICBM 2009a Nonlinear Symmetric
       atlas) used as a reference for axialization.*
     - *The subcortical weight mask of the T1w reference volume,
       emphasizing the subcortical region.*

.. note:: Both axialization and AC-PC alignment have similar goals of
          "regularizing" the orientation of a brain within a field of
          view.  However, please note that they are *not* the same
          thing.  The AC-PC alignment criterion is based on
          identifying 5 specific *local*, anatomical locations in the
          brain and using these to lever the brain
          orientation. Axialization is based on a *global*, whole
          brain alignment of brain structures (with the possible
          addition of a weight mask to emphasize certain parts of the
          structure).  

          In many cases, such as for typical/control brains, the
          results of either regularization may be very similar.
          However, there would be many scenarios where results would
          differ, and the user must choose what is most appropriate
          and/or feasible for their own study.

|

.. _DWI_distortions:

Distorted views of the DWI world
--------------------------------

What do distortions in DWI data look like?  Ugly stuff.

1. **EPI distortion**

   EPI distortions occur predominantly along the phase encode
   direction (often along the anterior-posterior orientation), and
   these cause both geometric distortions (brain warping: stretching
   and compressing) and signal intensity distortions (wrong signal
   value stored: signal pileup and attenuation).  These can effect
   both the reference *b* \=0 and gradient weighted volumes.  

   One can see the relative the locations of greatest distortion when
   comparing the oppositely phase encoded data.  TORTOISE uses
   registration between the oppositely encoded sets, as well as the
   anatomical reference, to reduce the warping distortions (see
   Irfanoglu et al., 2012).

   .. list-table:: 
      :header-rows: 1
      :widths: 50 50

      * - Identical slices, single subject DWI.
        -
      * - .. image:: media/Screenshot_from_2016-08-12_15:41:22.png
             :width: 100%
        - .. image:: media/Screenshot_from_2016-08-12_15:40:58.png
             :width: 100%
      * - *PA encoded b=0 volume.*
        - *AP encoded b=0 volume.*

   |

#. **Eddy current distortion**

   Rapid switching of the diffusion gradients causes distortions.
   These occur in the *b*\>0 volumes of a DWI data set.  They cause
   nonlinear distortions, and generally need nonlinear registration to
   reduce their effects.  The ``DIFFPREP`` part of TORTOISE tries to
   undo some of these.

#. **Subject motion**

   When we talk about subjection motion, we can talk about two main
   types: motion occuring between volumes, and motion that occurs with
   a TR.  (And in practice, there is often a combination of the two.)
   If motion happened only between TRs, then we are in a better
   position to "correct" some of its effects, essentially by using a
   good volume registration procedure.  The assumption is that the
   signal value at a location is what it should be-- we just have to
   reorient the head to put that voxel back where it was
   pre-motion. (NB: this is a simplification-- motion has other
   knock-on effects on data acquisition, but we hope these are fairly
   small.)

   The within-TR motion is quite problematic, though.  Consider a
   standard DWI acquisition sequence that collects axial slices in an
   interleaved pattern.  That is, it collects slices #0, 2, 4, 6, 8,
   etc. and then slices #1, 3, 5, 7, etc.  What happens if a person
   moves during this?  Pre-motion slices might be fine, but those
   afterward are not properly measured, and a distinctive brightness
   pattern can be seen in a sagittal view.  This is often known as the
   "Venetian blind" effect, and it is very easy to spot when looking
   at data-- this would be a good candidate to filter out.

   .. list-table:: 
      :header-rows: 1
      :widths: 100

      * - .. image:: media/Screenshot_from_2016-08-12_15:09:20.png
             :width: 100%
      * - *Example of subject motion artifact in a DWI volume that was
          acquired with an interleaved sequence (which is common).* 

   |

#. **Signal dropout**

   Signal dropout can occur due to susceptibility and excitation
   problems, sometimes limiting problems to just one slice.  However,
   that slice is effectively useless, and one might consider filtering
   out this volume.  (NB: in some cases, the volume could be left in
   if using an outlier rejection algorithm on a voxelwise basis for
   tensor fitting.)

   .. list-table:: 
      :header-rows: 1
      :widths: 100

      * - .. image:: media/Screenshot_from_2016-08-12_10:21:09.png
             :width: 100%
      * - *Example of a dropout slice in a DWI volume.*

