.. _fp_postpre_III:

Post-preproc, III: ROI map preparation
======================================

.. contents::
   :depth: 3

Overview
--------

The FreeSurfer (FS) defined regions may be useful for ROI-based
analysis or for tracking.  However, it should be noted that among the
GM regions can be non-local bits of general cortex that were not
specifically classified.  These come under the FS-labelling of
"Left-Cerebral-Cortex" (FS #3 and AFNI REN #2) and
"Right-Cerebral-Cortex" (FS #42 and AFNI REN #22) in both the "2000"
and "2009" parcellations.  These leftover-ish voxels don't really form
a solid region unto itself in the sense that most people would likely
want for any ROI-based analysis, even though they may indeed be in the
GM tissue mask.  So, in order to prepare for analyses where one just
wants localized regions, we demonstrate de-selecting these regions
from the GM maps in DT space that were created using
``fat_proc_map_to_dti`` in the step, ":ref:`postpre_II`".

Additionally, specifically in preparation for tracking, one might want
to inflate the GM regions, which we consider "targets" for the
tracking function, in a controlled way: 

* they can extend *up to*, but not too much into, DTI-defined WM (which,
  for healthy adult humans, is usually determined by where FA>0.2, in
  a standard proxy)

* they can extend *up to*, but not into, any other GM regions

The regions can be inflated with these properties by the AFNI-FATCAT
function ``3dROIMaker``, which is described in more detail (including
other options for controlling the ROIs) :ref:`HERE <Making_ROIs>`.


ROI selection and **3dROIMaker**
--------------------------------

.. note:: At some point there may be a separate function created for
          combining these capabilities.  For the present, we just
          describe one example of how the GM regions can be selected
          and then inflated.

**Proc:** We demonstrate de-selecting the non-clustered regions that
may (or may not, depending on FS) be in the GM parc/seg map.  This
pretty much depends on knowing what one wants to get rid of, by ROI
number designation.  The labeltable from the original file is
reattached.  

Finally, ``3dROIMaker`` is run to controlledly inflate the regions
that are left, with respect to the FA data (if one had non-adult or
non-human data, one might reconsider the FA-derived proxy for defining
where WM is). NB: I think I might most prefer using the
``-skel_stop_strict`` option to constrain the inflation. The resulting
set of commands are here::

    # for I/O, same path variable as above
    set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

    # for variable simplicity, just go to the dir with the ROI maps
    cd $path_P_ss/dwi_05

    # list all (= 2, probably) renumbered GM maps
    set ren_gm  = `ls indt_*_REN_gm.nii.gz`

    # supplementary files used in ROI process: FA map and WB mask
    set wmfa    = "dt_FA.nii.gz"
    set wbmask  = "dwi_mask.nii.gz"

    # process each GM map
    foreach gm_in ( $ren_gm )

        set gm_sel = "sel_${gm_in}"

        # apply the ROI (de)selector
        3dcalc                                       \
            -echo_edu                                \
            -a $gm_in                                \
            -expr 'a*not(equals(a,2)+equals(a,22))'  \
            -prefix $gm_sel

        # keep the labeltables from the original
        3drefit                                      \
            -copytables                              \
            $gm_in                                   \
            $gm_sel

        set gm_roi = "${gm_sel:gas/.nii.gz//}"

        # inflate GM ROIs up to (but not overlapping) the FA-WM
        3dROIMaker                                   \
            -inset    $gm_sel                        \
            -refset   $gm_sel                        \
            -skel_stop_strict                        \
            -skel_thr 0.2                            \
            -wm_skel  $wmfa                          \
            -inflate  1                              \
            -neigh_upto_vert                         \
            -mask     $wbmask                        \
            -prefix   $gm_roi                        \
            -nifti   

    end

-> produces output in the same directory 'data_proc/SUBJ_001/dwi_05/',
since all volume files occupy the same space/grid:

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory structure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/postpre_iii/fp_13_roi_sel_make.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output files made to select only clumpy GM ROIs and then to
       perform controlled inflation.*

|

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80
   :stub-columns: 0

   * - Outputs of
     - the above ``3dcalc``/\ ``3drefit``/\ ``3dROIMaker``
   * - **sel_indt_aparc\*+aseg_REN_gm.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 3D; the GM region map without the
       deselected ROIs. The same labeltable from the original input is
       contained within the file's header.
   * - **sel_indt_aparc\*+aseg_REN_gm_GMI.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 3D; the output of ``3dROIMaker`` which
       contains the inflated map of ROIs.
   * - **sel_indt_aparc\*+aseg_REN_gm_GMI.niml.lt**
     - text file; the labeltable of the NIFTI file with the same root
       name.
   * - **sel_indt_aparc\*+aseg_REN_gm_GM.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 3D; the output of ``3dROIMaker`` which
       contains the *non*\-inflated map of ROIs. (Having this output
       is useful if, for example, one uses ``3dROIMaker`` to subtract
       any regions from tissues, though that was not done here.)
   * - **sel_indt_aparc\*+aseg_REN_gm_GM.niml.lt**
     - text file; the labeltable of the NIFTI file with the same root
       name.

|

To view the dual points of 1) inflating the GM ROIs and 2)
constraining that inflation, we show images of before-and-after
inflation, for both the "2000" and "2009" parcellations.  The b/w ulay
is the binary mask where FA>0.2, representing the DTI-based proxy for
WM (and within which tracking normally occurs for healthy adult
humans).  Note that in the pre-inflation cases, one can often see GM
ROIs following the contours of the FA-WM, but there might be slight
gaps due to either transformation, partial voluming, etc. Such regions
might create artificial "misses" in the tracts, which don't leave the
FA>0.2 boundaries to reach the GM they (possibly) should.  Conversely,
in cases where the GM follows the FA-WM boundary well, we wouldn't
want inflation pouring out into the WM unnecessarily.

.. note:: When viewing the following montages, it might make sense to
          open corresponding montages of the inflated and non-inflated
          maps in browser tabs and then toggling views between them--
          that should highlight both of the main points.

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50

   * - Images comparing the "2000" inflated and non-inflated GM maps 
     - (just axi and sag views)
   * - .. image:: media/postpre_iii/sel__qc2000_uFA02_gm.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/postpre_iii/sel__qc2000_uFA02_gm.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 100

   * - *Non-inflated "2000" parc/seg map (after the non-regional ROIs
       were removed) olayed on FA>0.2 binary map ulay.*

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 50 50

   * - .. image:: media/postpre_iii/sel__qc2000_uFA02_GMI.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/postpre_iii/sel__qc2000_uFA02_GMI.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 100

   * - *Inflated "2000" parc/seg map (after the non-regional ROIs were
       removed) olayed on FA>0.2 binary map ulay.*

|


.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50

   * - Images comparing the "2009" inflated and non-inflated GM maps 
     - (just axi and sag views)
   * - .. image:: media/postpre_iii/sel__qc2009_uFA02_gm.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/postpre_iii/sel__qc2009_uFA02_gm.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 100

   * - *Non-inflated "2009" parc/seg map (after the non-regional ROIs
       were removed) olayed on FA>0.2 binary map ulay.*

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 50 50

   * - .. image:: media/postpre_iii/sel__qc2009_uFA02_GMI.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/postpre_iii/sel__qc2009_uFA02_GMI.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 100

   * - *Inflated "2009" parc/seg map (after the non-regional ROIs were
       removed) olayed on FA>0.2 binary map ulay.*
