.. _fp_postpre_II:

Post-preproc, II: mapping ROIs to DTI space
===========================================

.. contents::
   :depth: 3

Overview
--------

We might be interested in bringing other data into the processed
DWI/DT space.  For example, we could have FreeSurfer (FS) surfaces and
parcellations from an anatomical T1w volume (and we do!), which have
already been brought into AFNI+SUMAable formats by
``@SUMA_Make_Spec_FS``.  We can choose to bring just the volumetric
part of that (e.g., the segmentation+parcellation NIFTI files), or we
could bring both the volumes and surfaces. For the latter, this can
include the "\*.gii" surfaces themselves, as well as the supplementary
information in the "\*.niml.dset" files (such as the
annotation/labelling of nodes) and the "\*.spec" files (which describe
how all the surface states relate and which annotation files go with
each).

The above describes the role of ``fat_proc_map_to_dti``. In the
parlance of our times, we create a transformation map to the DWI's
[0]th volume from the FS-output T1w volume, and then we can
apply that mapping to the other "follower" volume, surface,
supplementary, etc. files.  The transformation is a 12 DOF linear
affine transform (made using ``3dAllineate``).  

One specifies the followers by their category. For volume files, one
can select whether the dset contains integers that should *stay*
integers (possibly with labeltables) with nearest neighbor ("NN")
resampling, or whether it has floating points values that can be
interpolated (with "wsinc5").  For surfaces, one specifies surface
files, supplementary NIML dsets and specification files separately;
however, we note that it only makes sense to map, say, \*.spec files
if one has matching surfaces and \*.niml.dset files\.\.\.

.. note:: In this example we map from a FS-processed T1w
          volume to DT space, bringing along FS parcellation
          maps and surfaces as followers.  

          However, one could also use this program to bring, say, FMRI
          data into DT space, since most FMRI processing pipelines
          involve aligning EPI to the subject's anatomical. One could
          make a map from the subject's T1w anatomical and have the
          FMRI maps be follower dsets.

.. _fp_postproc_map_to_dti:

**fat_proc_map_to_dti**
-----------------------

**Proc:** One specifies a source (here, the skull-stripped "brain.nii"
anatomical from FreeSurfer) and a base (the reference :math:`b_0` file
that is likely the [0]th brick in the post-TORTOISE DWI data set) for
making the transformation. 

One then can specify volumetric and surfacey follower data sets by
category.  Here, we select all the "renumbered" parcellation
volumetric files (see ``@SUMA_renumber_FS``, which is run as part of
``@SUMA_Make_Spec_FS`` for more info); many of these aren't likely to
be directly useful since they contain maps of "unknown" or "other"
regions from FS, but they don't take up much disk space when
compressed.  These will all have auto-snapshot images made of them in
the new space.

Finally, we chose to map the higher resolution standardized mesh
surfaces ("ld 141") from ``@SUMA_Make_Spec_FS``, as well as their
accompanying \*.niml.dsets and \*.spec files, for simpler viewing
later. At present, there is not auto-snapshot capability for SUMA
viewing; we describe some simplish ways to use the \*.spec files to
view the output, below.

This was all done by running (note the use of wildcards in selecting
many dsets per follower type)::

    # I/O path, same as above, following earlier steps
    set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

    fat_proc_map_to_dti                                                \
        -source          $path_P_ss/anat_02/SUMA/brain.nii             \
        -followers_NN    $path_P_ss/anat_02/SUMA/aparc*_REN_*.nii.gz   \
        -followers_surf  $path_P_ss/anat_02/SUMA/std.141.*.gii         \
        -followers_ndset $path_P_ss/anat_02/SUMA/std.141.*.niml.dset   \
        -followers_spec  $path_P_ss/anat_02/SUMA/std.141.*.spec        \
        -base            $path_P_ss/dwi_05/dwi_dwi.nii.gz'[0]'         \
        -prefix          $path_P_ss/dwi_05/indt

-> putting all of the outputs into the existing
'data_proc/SUBJ_001/dwi_05/' directory, since all the files there
should be in the same DT space:

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory substructure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/fp_12_map_to_dti_files.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output from fat_proc_map_to_dti.*

|

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80
   :stub-columns: 0

   * - Outputs of
     - ``fat_proc_dwi_to_dt``
   * - **indt_cmd.txt**
     - textfile, copy of the command that was run, and location
   * - **indt.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 3D; the "source" dset (here, the
       skull-stripped T1w output from FS) in the DT space; how well
       this aligns to the "base" diffusion volume determines the
       appropriateness of the transformation/mapping.
   * - **indt_map_allin.aff12.1D**
     - textfile, the 12 DOF linear affine registration parameters for
       the mapping process; gets applied to all the volumetric
       followers, and its inverse gets applied to the surface
       followers (AFNI and SUMA transforms work in opposite ways).
   * - **indt_aparc+aseg_REN_\*.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI files, 3D; each contains a parcellation and/or
       segmentation map from the FS "2000" parcellation, renumbered by
       ``@SUMA_renumber_FS`` into one of the following categories:
       all, csf, gm, othr, unkn, vent, wmat.
   * - **indt_aparc.a2009s+aseg_REN_\*.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI files, 3D; each contains a parcellation and/or
       segmentation map from the FS "2009" parcellation, renumbered by
       ``@SUMA_renumber_FS`` into one of the following categories:
       all, csf, gm, othr, unkn, vent, wmat.
   * - **indt_std.141.\*.gii**
     - surface GIFTI files; FS surfaces translated over, in this case
       the "ld 141" version of the standardized surface from
       ``@SUMA_Make_Spec_FS``.
   * - **indt_std.141.\*.niml.dset**
     - NIML format surface data sets; these contain things like
       parc/seg labeltables, etc. (made by ``@SUMA_Make_Spec_FS``).
   * - **indt_std.141.\*.spec**
     - specification files for defining relative states of surface
       dsets, as well as matching the \*.niml.dset label dsets with
       the appropriate surfaces (made by ``@SUMA_Make_Spec_FS``).
   * - **indt__qc00_base_u_esrc.\*.png**
     - autoimages, multiple slices within single volume; ulay =
       reference [0]th DWI volume (b/w); olay = FS structural file
       brain.nii, edgified (red); use these images to judge the
       quality of alignment.
   * - **indt__qc01_base_u_src.\*.png**
     - autoimages, multiple slices within single volume; ulay =
       reference [0]th DWI volume (b/w); olay = FS structural file
       brain.nii (translucent, "plasma" colorbar); use these images to
       judge the quality of alignment.
   * - **indt__qc_aparc+aseg_REN_\*.\*.png,
       indt__qc_aparc.a2009s+aseg_REN_\*.\*.png**
     - autoimages, multiple slices within single volume; ulay =
       reference [0]th DWI volume; olay = FS parcellation/segmentation
       maps for a given tissue grouping/classification (translucent,
       "ROI_i256" colorbar); can also use these images to judge the
       quality of alignment, as well as the parcellation/segmentation
       itself.

|

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50

   * - Autoimages of ``fat_proc_map_to_dti`` 
     - (just axi and sag views)
   * - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/indt__qc_aparc+aseg_REN_gm.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/indt__qc_aparc+aseg_REN_gm.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 100

   * - *FS "2000" parc/seg map: the GM ROIs from AFNI renumbering
       (translucent olay) [0]th DWI volume as (b/w ulay).*

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 50 50

   * - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/indt__qc_aparc.a2009s+aseg_REN_gm.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/indt__qc_aparc.a2009s+aseg_REN_gm.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 100

   * - *FS "2009" parc/seg map: the GM ROIs from AFNI renumbering
       (translucent olay) [0]th DWI volume as (b/w ulay).*

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 50 50

   * - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/indt__qc_aparc.a2009s+aseg_REN_wmat.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/indt__qc_aparc.a2009s+aseg_REN_wmat.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 100

   * - *FS "2009" parc/seg map: the WM ROIs from AFNI renumbering
       (translucent olay) [0]th DWI volume as (b/w ulay).*


.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 50 50

   * - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/indt__qc_aparc.a2009s+aseg_REN_csf.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/indt__qc_aparc.a2009s+aseg_REN_csf.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 100

   * - *FS "2009" parc/seg map: the CSF ROIs from AFNI renumbering
       (translucent olay) [0]th DWI volume as (b/w ulay).*


.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 50 50

   * - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/indt__qc_aparc.a2009s+aseg_REN_vent.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/indt__qc_aparc.a2009s+aseg_REN_vent.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 0
   :widths: 100

   * - *FS "2009" parc/seg map: the ventricle ROIs from AFNI
       renumbering (translucent olay) [0]th DWI volume as (b/w ulay).*

|

.. _fp_postproc_wb_tract_ex:

Tracking + surface viewing: AFNI+SUMA example
---------------------------------------------

Here is an example of using the data from the ``fat_proc_dwi_to_dt``
(from :ref:`HERE <fp_postproc_dwitodt>`) and ``fat_proc_map_to_dti``
(from :ref:`HERE <fp_postproc_map_to_dti>`) functions for
visualization in AFNI+SUMA *together*.  More in-depth descriptions of
tracking capabilities with ``3dTrackID`` are given :ref:`HERE
<Tracking>`, including a description of mini-probabilistic tracking in
relation to other modes.  More in-depth descriptions of SUMA
visualization are generally demonstrated :ref:`HERE <viewer>`, with
some specific reference to FATCAT demo examples :ref:`HERE
<FATCAT_Demo>`.

Both AFNI and SUMA can receive "key-press"-type information from the
command line, so that you can adjust the viewers and change things
that you would normally click or key-press in the GUI from scripts.
This functionality is known as "driving".  Some description of driving
SUMA are provided :ref:`HERE <self_guided_scripts>`, with lists of
drivable functionalities `HERE
<https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/program_help/DriveSuma.html>`_.
Lists of AFNI drivable functions are given `HERE
<https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/program_help/README.driver.html>`_.
You can also check out more FATCAT-specific examples in the FATCAT
Demo, which is obtainable as described `HERE
<https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/htmldoc/FATCAT/FATCAT_All.html#demo-data-sets-and-scripts>`_.

.. note:: We give a *brief* example here of using some basic SUMA
          capability in viewing surfaces+tract information, with
          additional AFNI-volume info.  Ziad Saad, as the main author
          of SUMA, deserves a huge amount of thanks for these
          capabilities.

**Proc A:** we will do a basic mini-probabilistic tracking through the
whole brain.  First, we erode the whole brain mask obtained by
automasking the T2w anatomical, because it contains parts of the skull
still, and we prefer to avoid the little erroneous stuff that would
appear there.  So, the following could be run in the directory
containing all the DT parameters (here 'data_proc/SUBJ_001/dwi_05/')::

    # erode (= dilate negatively) the WB mask to avoid skull stuff
    3dmask_tool                                  \
        -dilate_inputs -2                        \
        -inputs dwi_mask.nii.gz                  \
        -prefix dwi_mask_ERODE2.nii.gz

    # basic whole-brain, mini-prob tracking in it.
    3dTrackID                                    \
        -mode MINIP                              \
        -mini_num 5                              \
        -mask dwi_mask_ERODE2.nii.gz             \
        -netrois dwi_mask_ERODE2.nii.gz          \
        -dti_in dt                               \
        -prefix TTT                              \
        -uncert dt_UNC.nii.gz                    \
        -logic OR                                \
        -alg_Nseed_X 1                           \
        -alg_Nseed_Y 1                           \
        -alg_Nseed_Z 1                           \
        -no_indipair_out 

-> producing the following files:

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory substructure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/fp_12_view_wbtract.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Files output from WB mask erosion with 3dmask_tool and
       mini-probabilistic tracking with 3dTrackID.*

|

**Proc B:** Then, we set a couple environment variables and load up
AFNI and SUMA to view the results.  We include volumetric, surface and
tract data sets. We use the fun capability of AFNI and SUMA to "talk"
to each other in order to send information back and forth in the
viewers: the outlines of the surfaces from SUMA appear in the AFNI
windows, and some overlay coloration from AFNI will appear on the
surfaces in SUMA::

    # port for AFNI-SUMA communications, and end all other chatter on it
    set cport = 12
    @Quiet_Talkers -npb_val $cport

    # set line thickness of SUMA surfaces sent to AFNI
    setenv AFNI_SUMA_LINESIZE 0.005

    # Open talkable AFNI
    afni -npb $cport -niml -yesplugouts &

    # Choose ulay (anat) and olay (FA>0.2) in AFNI
    plugout_drive                                   \
        -npb $cport                                 \
        -com 'SWITCH_UNDERLAY  dwi_anat.nii.gz'     \
        -com 'SWITCH_OVERLAY   dt_FA.nii.gz'        \
        -com "SEE_OVERLAY      +"                   \
        -com "SET_PBAR_ALL +99 1.0 Plasma"          \
        -com 'SET_THRESHNEW 0.2'                    \
        -quit

    # Open talkable SUMA
    suma                                            \
        -npb $cport -niml                           \
        -spec  indt_std.141.SUBJ_001_both.spec      \
        -sv    dwi_anat.nii.gz                      \
        -vol   dwi_anat.nii.gz                      \
        -tract TTT_000.niml.tract &

    # Drive SUMA to start it 'talking' with AFNI; also puts image at 
    # straight-ahead "coronal" view, and hides one hemisphere surface,
    # so tracts inside are visible
    DriveSuma                                       \
        -npb $cport                                 \
        -com viewer_cont -key '.' -key 't'          \
        -com viewer_cont -key 'Ctrl+shift+up' -key ']' 

-> producing the following images (note: there may be some small
differences on your system, depending on other environment variable
settings that may exist there in your ~/.afnirc and ~/.sumarc files,
or afni_layout settings):

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Basic viewing of surface+volume+tracking results in both AFNI
       and SUMA.
   * - .. image:: media/postpre_ii/fp_12_view_tract_surf.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Viewing AFNI and SUMA talking together to display lots of
       structural data.  The overlay in AFNI is the FA map thresholded
       at FA>0.2.*

.. note:: This is just the tip of the ice berg in terms of AFNI+SUMA
          viewing of structure, combining data and interactively
          viewing it.  Please do download the the FATCAT Demo examples
          (again, see `HERE
          <https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/htmldoc/FATCAT/FATCAT_All.html#demo-data-sets-and-scripts>`_),
          and check out the processing scripts there for more.
