.. _fp_prepre_I:

Pre-preproc, I: convert and niceify
=========================================

.. contents::
   :depth: 3

Description
-----------

Many of the following pre-preprocessing steps are convenience features
for organizing, viewing, and assessing data, while at the same timing
preparing to run major "pre"processing with several software
functions.  The present description page may look long, but much of
that is to including snapshots of terminals and autoimages along the
way.

The purposes of this set of scripts are: 

* to convert DICOMs to NIFTIs, putting (0, 0, 0) at the volume's
  center of mass (useful for alignment, viewing, rotating) and giving
  all the same orientation (in particular, one with "x,y,z"-ordered
  coordinates, making the application of transformations simpler)
  
* to allow the DWIs to be viewed, quality-checked and filtered
  according to the user's judgment (e.g., remove dropout volumes
  or those with heavy motion distortion)

* to filter volume, gradient and *b*\-value files of a given data
  set simultaneously

* to process dual phase encoded DWI data sets (i.e., when AP-PA data
  are present) in parallel, in order to maintain matched
  volumes/gradients

* to axialize a reference anatomical (i.e., put it into "nice"
  alignment within a volume's axes/orientation) for slice viewing,
  structure coloration, and group alignment

* (*if driven by necessity*) to make an imitation T2w-like contrast
  reference volume if only a T1w is available; NB: 'tis far better to
  have the real thing, probably, but one is not always available

You can skip any steps that aren't applicable. I will assume that each
acquired volume is currently a set of unpacked DICOMs sitting in its
own directory. If a directory structure is set up well, it should be
possible to loop through all subjects with the same few commands. (The
filtering step, though, would likely require its own command per
subject, as motion/distortion will occur in different volumes for
different subjects.)

Note that each function listed below has its own helpfile, describing
more details, defaults and available options.  Here, default names and
locations of things (such as output directories, prefixes, etc.) are
often used in order to simplerify life.

.. note:: Having matched DWI data sets with opposite phase encoding
          (e.g., AP and PA) is useful for correcting EPI distortions.
          However, if you only have one, whether it is AP or PA
          doesn't really matter for this pre-processing-- I will refer
          to single phase encode data sets as 'AP' just for simplicity
          of description, but either encoding would get treated the
          same.

|

Example Setup
-------------

Consider starting with the following data set of a healthy, human
adult in a diffusion-based study that is acquiring dual phase encoded
DWIs. We make a group directory for a study (e.g.,
"DTI_GROUP_STUDY/"), with a tree for "raw," unprocessed DICOMs
("data_basic/") and one for processed volumes and files
("data_proc/"), with a subdirectory for each subject.  Consider one
subject's directory ("SUBJ_001/"), which contains four sets of DICOM
directories:

* "dwi_ap/": DWI set acquired with the phase encode direction
  anterior->posterior.  There is one directory of DICOMs acquired with
  gradients for just DTI reconstruction ("mr_0003/", with 3 volumes
  with *b*\=0 volumes and 30 with *b*\=1100 :math:`{\rm s~mm^{-2}}`),
  and two others with higher b-valued shells for including with a more
  complicated reconstruction ("mr_0004/", with 3 volumes with *b*\=0
  and 30 with *b*\=2500 :math:`{\rm s~mm^{-2}}`; "mr_0005/", with 3
  volumes *b*\=0 and 30 with *b*\=5000 :math:`{\rm s~mm^{-2}}`). The
  spatial resolution is :math:`2.5\times2.5\times2.5~{\rm mm}^3`;
  perhaps more standard/desirable would be 2~mm isotropic.
 
* "dwi_pa/": DWI set acquired with the same gradients as the AP one
  (with same respective shells stored in "mr_0006/" "mr_0007/"
  "mr_0008/"), though with the phase encode direction reversed,
  posterior->anterior.

* "t2w/": a T2w anatomical (with fat suppression-- highly recommended
  if at all possible) with :math:`1.25\times1.25\times1.70~{\rm mm}^3`
  spatial resolution. This is still much higher resolution than the
  DWI data, which is great; perhaps isotropic resolution would be
  preferable.

* "t1w/": a T1w anatomical (standard MPRAGE) with
  :math:`1\times1\times1 {\rm mm}^3` spatial resolution.


.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory structure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/fp_00_data_basic.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Initial, basic subject directory layout: a branch of
       unprocessed data ("data_basic/"), containing one directory per
       subject ("SUBJ_001/"), containing one directory per type of
       dset ("dwi_ap/", etc.), containing one or more directory of
       dicoms ("mr_00\*/").*

|

Comments and notes
------------------

In this primary example, we will reconstruct the set as follows.  We
will use both the AP and PA diffusion data in order to perform EPI
distortion correction with ``DR_BUDDI``, but we will employ just the
set of DTI-like acquisitions (3 volumes with *b*\=0 volumes and 30
with *b*\=1100 :math:`{\rm s~mm^{-2}}`).  We will use the T2w volume
as an anatomical reference within TORTOISE functions, and we will use
the T1w volume for parcellation+segmentation in FreeSurfer.

.. note:: There will be a separate+parallel example description for
          the conversion and usage of all DWI sets.  When I get
          time...

          There will also be a separate description of processing as
          if there were no T2w volume, when I get even *more* time.

The help file of each function contains more options that are not
listed in this "vanilla" processing description.  It would behoove the
reader to check those out.

Before processing, I have made a "data_proc/" directory that is
parallel to the "data_basic/" one.  The idea is that if I need to redo
processing, I can move the entire tree and redo it.  Additionally, as
I loop through each subject directory in "data_basic/" (e.g., here,
"SUBJ_001/"), I make a directory of the same name under "data_proc/"
to hold all the processed data.  

|

.. _fp_convert_dcm_dwis:

**fat_proc_convert_dcm_dwis**: Convert DWIs
-------------------------------------------

For each DWI set, go from DICOMs to having a NIFTI volume plus
supplementary text files: a '\*.bvec' file has the unit normal
gradients, and a '\*.bval' file has the diffusion weighting b-values.

The (x, y, z) = (0, 0, 0) coordinate of the data set is placed at the
center of mass of the volume (and, when AP-PA sets are loaded, the
sets could be given the same origin); having large distance among data
sets create problems for rotating visualizations and for alignment
processes.  Volumes should all have the same orientation ("RPI" by
default) and be anonymized (depends on things like filenames chosen;
users should doublecheck anonymizing).

**Proc:** A paired set of *N* DWIs with opposite phase encode
directions (in "data_basic/SUBJ_001/dwi_ap/" and
"data_basic/SUBJ_001/dwi_pa/")::

  # for I/O, "basic" (= DICOM) and "proc" (= NIFTI) directories
  set path_B_ss = data_basic/SUBJ_001
  set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

  fat_proc_convert_dcm_dwis              \
      -indir  $path_B_ss/dwi_ap/mr_0003  \
      -prefix $path_P_ss/dwi_00/ap

  fat_proc_convert_dcm_dwis              \
      -indir  $path_B_ss/dwi_pa/mr_0006  \
      -prefix $path_P_ss/dwi_00/pa

-> produces one new directory in 'data_proc/SUBJ_001/', called
"dwi_00/":

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory structure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/fp_01_data_proc_dwi_00.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output files made by fat_proc_convert_dcm_dwis commands for
       both the AP and PA data.*

It contains the following outputs for the AP data (and analogous
outputs for the PA sets):

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80
   :stub-columns: 0

   * - Outputs of
     - ``fat_proc_convert_dcm_dwis``
   * - **ap_cmd.txt**
     - textfile, copy of the command that was run, and location
   * - **ap.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 4D (*N*\=33 volumes)
   * - **ap_bval.dat**
     - textfile, row file of *N* b-values
   * - **ap_rvec.dat**
     - textfile, row file of (DW scaled) b-vectors (:math:`3\times N`)
   * - **ap_cvec.dat**
     - textfile, column file of (DW scaled) b-vectors (:math:`N\times 3`)
   * - **ap_matA.dat**
     - textfile, column file of (DW scaled) AFNI-style *b*\-matrix
       (:math:`N\times 6`)
   * - **ap_matT.dat**
     - textfile, column file of (DW scaled) TORTOISE-style *b*\-matrix
       (:math:`N\times 6`)
   * - **ap_onescl.\*.png**
     - autoimages, one slice per DWI volume, with single scaling
       across all volumes
   * - **ap_sepscl.\*.png**
     - autoimages, one slice per DWI volume, with separate scalings
       for each volume

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 100

   * - Autoimages of ``fat_proc_convert_dcm_dwis``
   * - .. image:: media/pa_sepscl.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - *PA volumes, separate scaling per volume, sagittal view.  The
       integer numbers in the upper left hand corner ("#N") of each
       panel are the volume number in the image.  There are 33 volumes
       in this dset, with the final two blank panels (#33 and #34)
       merely appended for to display a full matrix.*
   * - .. image:: media/ap_sepscl.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - *AP volumes, separate scaling per volume, sagittal view.  The
       image formatting is the same as above.*

.. note:: Toggling between those sets of images highlights just why
          the AP-PA (or blip up-blip down) distortion correction for
          EPI inhomogeneity must be done.  For example, you could open
          this on adjacent browser tabs and switch back and forth.

No gradient flipping has been performed (but it could be, if you
wanted).  

The AP and PA dsets match volume-for-volume.  Interestingly, one can
notice the difference in overall brain shape between the AP and PA
dsets; for example, one can open each set in their own browser tabs
and toggle back and forth.


.. 
    * **Case B:** A single set of *N* DWIs acquired with a single phase
      encode direction (in SUB01/01_dicom_dir_AP/)::

         fat_pre_convert_dwis.tcsh                        \
             -indir_ap  SUB01/01_dicom_dir_AP

      -> produces a single directory called 'SUB01/UNFILT_AP/', which
      contains three files: AP.nii (*N* volumes), AP.bvec (3x\ *N*
      lines) and AP.bval (1x\ *N* lines). Output would look similar to
      **Case A** but without the PA results.

    * **Case C:** Multiple sets each in separate directories, for example
      each with *Q* DWIs with a single phase encode direction (in
      SUB01/01_dicom_dir_AP/, SUB01/02_dicom_dir_AP/,
      SUB01/02_dicom_dir_AP/)::

         fat_pre_convert_dwis.tcsh                        \
             -indir_ap  "SUB01/0*_dicom_dir_AP"

      -> produces a single directory called 'SUB01/UNFILT_AP/', which
      contains three files: AP.nii (*N*\=3\ *Q* volumes), AP.bvec (3x\ *N*
      lines) and AP.bval (1x\ *N* lines). Output would look similar to
      **Case A** but without the PA results. Note the use of double
      quotes around the wildcarded file directories after ``-indir_ap``;
      the quotes are necessary for either a wildcarded expression or a
      simple list of directories after ``-indir_ap`` or ``-indir_pa``.


|

**fat_proc_convert_dcm_anat**: Convert anatomical volume(s)
-----------------------------------------------------------

For each anatomical volume set (here, we have both a T1w and T2w
volume), go from DICOMs to having a NIFTI volume.

As for DWIs above, the (x, y, z) = (0, 0, 0) coordinate of the data
set is placed at the center of mass of the volume. Volumes should all
have the same orientation ("RPI" by default) and be anonymized
(depends on things like filenames chosen; users should doublecheck
anonymizing).

**Proc:** Two separate anatomical volumes, a T1w and a T2w dset (in
"data_basic/SUBJ_001/t1w/" and "data_basic/SUBJ_001/t2w/")::

  # for I/O, same path variables as above in the DWI case
  set path_B_ss = data_basic/SUBJ_001
  set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

  fat_proc_convert_dcm_anat              \
      -indir  $path_B_ss/t1w/mr_0014     \
      -prefix $path_P_ss/anat_00/t1w

  fat_proc_convert_dcm_anat              \
      -indir  $path_B_ss/t2w/mr_0002     \
      -prefix $path_P_ss/anat_00/t2w

-> produces one new directory in 'data_proc/SUBJ_001/', called
"anat_00/":

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory structure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/fp_02_data_proc_anat_00.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output files made by fat_proc_convert_dcm_anat commands for
       both the T1w and T2w data.*

It contains the following outputs for the T1w data (and analogous
outputs for the T2w sets):

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80
   :stub-columns: 0

   * - Outputs of
     - ``fat_proc_convert_dcm_anat``
   * - **t1w_cmd.txt**
     - textfile, copy of the command that was run, and location
   * - **t1w.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 3D (single brick volume)
   * - **t1w__qc00_anat.\*.png**
     - autoimages, multiple slices per DWI volume, with single
       scaling across the volume

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 100

   * - Autoimages of ``fat_proc_convert_dcm_anat``
   * - .. image:: media/t1w__qc00_anat.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - *Slices of the T1w volume, single scaling for the volume,
       axial view.  The float numbers in the upper left hand corner
       ("#XI" and "#XS") of each panel are the physical space
       coordinate for that slice (in RAI-DICOM notation, which is
       default in the AFNI GUI viewer).*
   * - .. image:: media/t2w__qc00_anat.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - *T2w volumes, single scaling per volume, axial view.  The
       image formatting is the same as above.*

.. note:: Notice that here the T2w volume is really quite oblique to
          the acquired field of view (FOV).  When using this as a
          reference volume in TORTOISE, the DWI volumes would also end
          up with major axes unaligned to those of the dset FOV; this
          would be highly non-ideal for things like RGB coloration and
          systematic viewing/comparisons.  This is dealt with in the
          next step ("axialization").

|

**fat_proc_axialize_anat**: Axialize the anatomical
---------------------------------------------------

There are many reasons why it would be useful to have subject volumes
well-aligned (i.e., major brain axes aligned with the volume's FOV, so
that slices planes are in "standard" viewing orientation):

* for group alignment, all volumes start "nearer" to each other

* views across the group are more similar and therefore easier to
  compare and/or spot differences and similarities

* since the T2w volume will be useful for DWI reference alignment in
  TORTOISE, then alignment leads to RGB coloration of structures in
  DWI being both uniform across group and standardly interpretable
  (e.g., transcallosal regions are red; cingular fibers are green;
  cortico-spinal tracts are mainly blue).

If a subject's head is strongly tilted in the volumetric FOV, then the
display of slices might be awkward, anatomical definition might be
tricky, tract/structure coloration could be non-standard, and later
alignments might be made more difficult.  

The present "axialization" process is akin to an automated form of
"AC-PC alignment" that is sometimes performed (for example, using
MIPAV)-- but, importantly, it is **not the same thing**.  This program
"rights the ship" by calculating an affine alignment to a reference
volume of the user's choice (e.g., a standard space Talairach volume),
*but only applying the rotation/translation part*, so that the
subject's brain doesn't warp/change shape (and brightness values are
not altered, except by minor smoothing due to rotation).

Axialization can be applied to either a T2w or T1w volume.  The "mode"
of running must be specified, basically as whether the volume in
question has either contrast similar to a human adult's T2w volume
(``-mode_t2w``) or T1w volume (``-mode_t1w``).  The mode selection
mainly specifies some processing options internally.  Note that for
newborn infant dsets, one might invert the mode flag (i.e., use
``-mode_t1w`` for an infant T2w volume), because the contrasts at
young ages are inverted.  Sigh, I know, that's not ideal, but that's
life at present.

**Proc:** This takes the NIFTI T2w dset (in
"data_proc/SUBJ_001/anat_00/") and axializes it with respect to the
reference dset (here, from the MNI 2009 templates, which was manually
AC-PC aligned and regridded to have an even number of slices in all
FOV planes as described :ref:`here <suppl_refsets_mni>`), with some
extra weighting for the subcortical regions (via ``-extra_al_wtmask
*``); and the output volume will match the grid of the input volume
(``-out_match_ref``)::

  # I/O path, same as above; just need the "proc" dirs now
  set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

  # reference anatomical volumes to which we axialize
  set here       = $PWD
  set ref_t2w    = $here/mni_icbm152_t2_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE.nii.gz
  set ref_t2w_wt = $here/mni_icbm152_t2_relx_tal_nlin_sym_09a_ACPCE_wtell.nii.gz 

  fat_proc_axialize_anat                       \
      -inset  $path_P_ss/anat_00/t2w.nii.gz    \
      -prefix $path_P_ss/anat_01/t2w           \
      -mode_t2w                                \
      -refset          $ref_t2w                \
      -extra_al_wtmask $ref_t2w_wt             \
      -out_match_ref

-> produces one new directory in 'data_proc/SUBJ_001/', called
"anat_01/":

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory structure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/fp_03_anat_01.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output files made by fat_proc_axialize_anat commands for the
       T2w data set.*

It contains the following outputs for the T2w data:

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80
   :stub-columns: 0

   * - Outputs of
     - ``fat_proc_axialize_anat``
   * - **t2w_cmd.txt**
     - textfile, copy of the command that was run, and location
   * - **t2w_12dof.param.1D**
     - textfile, the 12 DOF linear affine transformation matrix
       produced by ``3dAllineate`` during the processing; this is
       the applied transformation, so only the solid body
       (translation+rotation) elements of the matrix can be nonzero.
   * - **t2w.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 3D (single brick volume), now
       axialized (hopefully)
   * - **t2w_qc00_fin.\*.png**
     - autoimages, multiple slices per 3D volume, with single
       scaling across the volume, showing the final axialized
       volume; grid slice lines are also shown in the central
       volume, for visual reference of major plane lines.
   * - **t2w_qc01_ref_u_inp.\*.png**
     - autoimages, multiple slices per 3D volume; the image is in
       the space of the ``-refset *`` with single scaling across the
       ulay volume (the reference dset); the olay dset is an
       edge-ified version of how the ``-inset *`` volume was aligned
       to it, for QC and possible trouble-shooting purposes.

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50

   * - Autoimages of ``fat_proc_axialize_anat``
     -
   * - t2w_qc00_fin.\*.png
     - t2w_qc01_ref_u_inp.\*.png
   * - .. image:: media/t2w_qc00_fin.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/t2w_qc01_ref_u_inp.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - .. image:: media/t2w_qc00_fin.cor.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/t2w_qc01_ref_u_inp.cor.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - .. image:: media/t2w_qc00_fin.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/t2w_qc01_ref_u_inp.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - *Images of the final volume, for checking the alignment of
       brain structures with major FOV axes.*
     - *Intermediate volume images, for checking the relative
       goodness of alignment fit of the anatomical (edge-ified olay)
       with the refset volume (ulay).*

*TIPS*: 

- For any anatomical, it might useful to resample the volume to
  isotropic, fairly high resolution both for viewing and later
  registration purposes.  This could be done by outputting on the
  refset's grid, or also by specifying an isotropic resolution, such
  as to isotropic :math:`1 {\rm mm}^{3}` using::

    -extra_al_opts "-newgrid 1.0"

  Something similar (perhaps using a different resolution) might be
  useful in most cases with this function.

- When things go wrong with alignment, and the dsets don't appear to
  overlap much at all, it could be that they started too far apart in
  the first place; using ``-pre_center_mass`` might help provide an
  initial alignment, esp. if a either the inset or refset is not
  well-centered-- i.e., center of mass near (0,0,0)-- in the first place.

- Sometimes, anatomical volumes will have lots of non-brain material
  in the FOV, such as neck and sub-brain volumes.  When that is the
  case, the center of mass of the FOV might be moved "down" with
  respect to a reference volume.  In such a case, it might be useful
  to pre-remove some number *N* of axial slices from the inferior part
  of the FOV, using ``-remove_inf_sli N``; in conjunction with
  ``-pre_center_mass``, this might provide a better starting point for
  alignment (NB: this "removal" is only for alignment purposes; the
  final dset will not have any slices removed from this).

|

.. _fp_align_anat_pair:

**fat_proc_align_anat_pair**: Align T1w -> T2w
----------------------------------------------

At this point, it might be useful to align the T1w anatomical to the
newly axialized T2w volume.  Then, the T1w itself should be axialized.
NB: by default, this alignment is just a "solid body" (rotation +
translation) transformation, so there is no change in shape of the T1w
volume (besides the minimal amounts of smoothing involved with
regridding); if desired, one can provide an option to
``fat_proc_align_anat_pair`` to allow for any set of the full linear
affine parameters available in ``3dAllineate``.

Additionally, if one is aiming to run FreeSurfer's ``recon-all`` on
the T1w, this step can be useful for preparing the volume for that.
In particular, at present (FreeSurfer versions up to 6.0) the function
seems to tacitly require having:

* **isotropic voxels**:

  - 1 mm edges, by default.

  - | for higher resolution (sub-millimeter) data, the `FreeSurfer website
      <https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/SubmillimeterRecon>`_ 
      states:
    | *"The method works well for voxel sizes 0.75 mm3. It should work
      with voxel between 1mm3 and 0.75mm3. Inputs with 0.5 mm3
      voxels or below will have a brainmask failure..."*
    | \.\.\. and one should use the ``-hires`` flag in ``recon-all``
      for such data.
    
* **even numbers of slices** in all directions of the dset FOV; not
  having this will affect results negatively.

These properties can be conveyed to the T1w dset at this stage. 

.. note:: This step is quite optional.  However, if one doesn't align
          the volumes now, one should still take care that the T1w
          volume *does* have the above properties before FreeSurfering
          with ``recon-all``.

**Proc:** Align the T1w (in "data_proc/SUBJ_001/anat_00/") and align
it to the axialized T2w volume (in "data_proc/SUBJ_001/anat_01/"); the
T2w volume here has both isotropic voxels with 1 mm edges and even
numbers of slices in all directions, so we make the T1w volume output
be on the same grid, so it has these properties, as well (there are
other options for controlling these things, as well)::

  # for I/O, same path variable as above
  set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

  fat_proc_align_anat_pair                     \
      -in_t1w    $path_P_ss/anat_00/t1w.nii.gz \
      -in_t2w    $path_P_ss/anat_01/t2w.nii.gz \
      -prefix    $path_P_ss/anat_01/t1w        \
      -out_t2w_grid

-> produces new data in the existing directory in
'data_proc/SUBJ_001/anat_01', because the new T1w volume is
essentially in the same space as the reference T2w volume now.

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory structure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/fp_04_anat_01b.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output files made by fat_proc_align_anat_pair commands for the
       T1w data set (t1w\*), as well as the earlier-made T2w reference
       volume (t2w*).*

It contains the following outputs for the T2w data:

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80
   :stub-columns: 0

   * - Outputs of
     - ``fat_proc_axialize_anat``
   * - **t1w_cmd.txt**
     - textfile, copy of the command that was run, and location
   * - **t1w_map_anat.aff12.1D**
     - textfile, the 12 DOF linear affine transformation matrix
       produced by ``3dAllineate`` during the processing.
   * - **t1w.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 3D (single brick volume), now
       aligned to the T2w volume.
   * - **t1w__qc00_t2w_u_et1w.\*.png**
     - autoimages, multiple slices per 3D volume, with single scaling
       across the volume, showing the T2w reference as the ulay, and
       an edge-ified version of the T1w volume as the olay, to just
       the quality of fitting by sulcal features, tissue boundaries,
       etc.
   * - **t1w__qc01_t2w_u_t1w.\*.png**
     - autoimages, multiple slices per 3D volume; the T2w reference as
       the ulay, with a translucent version of the T1w volume as the
       olay.

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50

   * - Autoimages of ``fat_proc_align_anat_pair``
     -
   * - t1w__qc00_t2w_u_et1w.\*.png
     - t1w__qc01_t2w_u_t1w.\*.png
   * - .. image:: media/t1w__qc00_t2w_u_et1w.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/t1w__qc01_t2w_u_t1w.axi.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - .. image:: media/t1w__qc00_t2w_u_et1w.cor.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/t1w__qc01_t2w_u_t1w.cor.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - .. image:: media/t1w__qc00_t2w_u_et1w.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
     - .. image:: media/t1w__qc01_t2w_u_t1w.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - *T2w reference as ulay, with edge-ified final T1w volume as
       olay, for checking the alignment of brain structures.*
     - *T2w reference as ulay, with translucent final T1w volume as
       olay, for checking the alignment of brain structures.*

















..
    .. _IRCT_invert:

    Make a T2w-like volume from a T1w one
    -------------------------------------

    For TORTOISEing, one should have a T2w anatomical, which is used as
    a reference volume to help unwarp things.  It has the useful
    properties of (hopefully) being relatively undistorted and of
    having similar contrast to the *b*\ =0 DWI volume.

    In the event that you *didn't* acquire such volumes as part of a
    study but that you *do* have T1w volumes, you can invert the
    brightness of the latter to estimate the relative tissue contrast
    of the former for use as a reference volume in TORTOISE.  You
    should probably *not* use the resulting imitation T2w volume for
    other applications, though.

    * A single T1w volume (SUB01/ANATOM/anat_axi.nii)::

        fat_pre_t2w_from_t1w.tcsh                        \
            -inset  SUB01/ANATOM/anat_axi.nii

      -> produces three files in SUB01/ANATOM/ called out_t2w.nii (the
      main output of interest), out_t1w.nii (a somewhat
      processed/polished T1w volume) and out_t1w_ss.nii (a
      skull-stripped version of the preceding file).  There is a bit of
      dim skull + noise outside the brain the first two files; it seems
      to matter for TORTOISE that there isn't zero-noise.

      .. list-table:: 
         :header-rows: 0
         :widths: 100

         * - .. image:: media/Screenshot_from_2016-08-12_09:53:56.png
                :width: 90%
                :align: center
         * - *End of 'T1w inversion -> ~T2w' script message, and
             listing of directories afterwards.*

    This processing depends on skull-stripping in order to isolate the
    brain for inverting.  Skull-stripping is *really* a hard thing to
    do consistently algorithmically, so it is possible to do that
    separately and enter an isolated brain in as another option; see
    the help file for more about this and other minorly fun things.

    And always visually check to see that the output looks reasonable!


    Filter out (bad) DWIs
    ---------------------

    Say you have *N* DWIs in your data set; you will also have *N*
    gradient vectors and *N* b-values.  If you remove any DWI volume
    (e.g., perhaps it was corrupted by motion or had extreme dropout),
    then you also want to remove the corresponding gradient and b-value
    from their respective text files; and if you have AP-PA data, then
    you want to remove the corresponding DWI/grad/b-value from the
    opposite phase encoded set, so that every DWI has a partner.

    Here, we'll suppose that you look at each AP and/or PA DWIs (you
    can view the data in AFNI) and write down the indices of obviously
    bad/corrupted volumes.  Remember, AFNI indices start at '0'.  Then
    you enter the volumes and volume ranges **to be kept**, using
    standard AFNI notation for brick selection.

    * **Case A:** A paired set of *N* DWIs acquired with opposite phase
      encode directions (in SUB01/UNFILT_AP/AP.nii and
      SUB01/UNFILT_PA/PA.nii, each having correponding '\*.bvec' and
      '\*.bval' files of matching length in the respective directories);
      assume you want to remove the volumes with index 4, 5 and 8,
      leaving *M*\ =\ *N*\ -3 volumes/grads::

         fat_pre_filter_dwis.tcsh                           \
             -inset_ap  SUB01/UNFILT_AP/AP.nii              \
             -inset_pa  SUB01/UNFILT_PA/PA.nii              \
             -select    "[0..3,6,7,9..$]"

      -> produces a pair of directories called 'SUB01/FILT_AP/' and
      'SUB01/FILT_PA/', each of which contains three files: in the
      first, AP.nii (*M* volumes), AP.bvec (3x\ *M* lines) and AP.bval
      (1x\ *M* lines); and in the second, an analogously named set of
      identical dimensions.

      .. list-table:: 
         :header-rows: 0
         :widths: 100

         * - .. image:: media/Screenshot_from_2016-08-12_11:00:19.png
                :width: 90%
                :align: center
         * - *End of 'DWI filtering' script message, and listing of
             directories afterwards.*
         * - .. image:: media/Screenshot_from_2016-08-12_11:00:49.png
                :width: 90%
                :align: center
         * - *File listing within the filtered directories.*
         * - .. image:: media/Screenshot_from_2016-08-12_11:01:50.png
                :width: 90%
                :align: center
         * - *Command line checking of difference in number of volumes.*
         * - .. image:: media/Screenshot_from_2016-08-12_11:08:00.png
                :width: 90%
                :align: center
         * - *Command line checking of difference in number of entries
             in text files, bvals (top pair) and bvecs (bottom pair).
             Columns are: # of lines, # of total words or numbers, # of
             characters.*
      |

    * **Case B (and C, from above):** A single set of *N* DWIs acquired
      with a single phase encode direction (in SUB01/UNFILT_AP/AP.nii,
      along with correponding '\*.bvec' and '\*.bval' files of matching
      length); assume you want to remove the volumes with index 4, 5
      and 8, leaving *M*\ =\ *N*\ -3 volumes/grads::

         fat_pre_filter_dwis.tcsh                           \
             -inset_ap  SUB01/UNFILT_AP/AP.nii              \
             -select    "[0..3,6,7,9..$]"

      -> produces a single directory called 'SUB01/FILT_AP/', which
      contains three files: AP.nii (*M* volumes), AP.bvec (3x\ *M*
      lines) and AP.bval (1x\ *M* lines). 

    Other output directory names and prefixes can be chosen. It's
    important to note that TORTOISE will decide its own output
    directory names based on the prefix of the NIFTI file, so you don't
    want the paired phase encode files to have the same prefixes. In
    terms of the volume selection index rules, the '..$' represents 'to
    the last volume in the data set'; if this and other rules aren't
    familiar, check the AFNI docs, such as the help of ``3dcalc``.

