.. _fp_preproc_TORTOISE:


Preproc: TORTOISE
=================

.. contents::
   :depth: 3

Comments
--------

This stage describes performing the "actual" preprocessing of the DWIs
themselves, in terms of reducing the effects of distortions due to
subject motion, eddy currents and B0 inhomogeneities.  This collective
action is usually called "distortion correction," although we should
be clear that at best we can only *reduce effects* of distortions
retrospectively.  The degree to which that desirable goal is possible
depends on the processing tools being used, but also (heavily) on the
study design and on the acquired data. In practice, as well, the
practical effectiveness of processing also depends on the type of
analysis to be performed afterwards, because the answer to the
question, "Are my data clean enough to be appropriate for analysis
*X*?" depends on what the details and assumptions of that testing are.

These major steps are performed using `the TORTOISE tools
<https://science.nichd.nih.gov/confluence/display/nihpd/TORTOISE>`_,
which are also freely available from the NIH (thanks, taxpayers!).
Here, we describe briefly how we use ``DIFFPREP`` and ``DR_BUDDI`` in
TORTOISE v3.\* (no description of ``DIFF_CALC``; we perform fitting
with AFNI-FATCAT tools).  

The data set used here has the following
characteristics:

* pretty clean, not super distorted or noisy

* acquired on a 3T scanner

* from a human

* from an (ostensibly healthy) adult.

**:math:`\rightarrow` If your data are not so, then you should check
with the TORTOISE folks about options and flags to use in the
commands.** Even if your data *do* match these characteristics, you
should probably be in touch with them about finer points of this
processing analysis.  Here, we try to work closely with the TORTOISE
folks, to keep in touch with the latest-and-greatest updates and to
represent those here, but it is worth being veeery clear about fine
details in processing.

.. note:: **Disclaimer:** while we work closely with the TORTOISE
          folks, trying to keep in touch with the latest-and-greatest
          updates and to represent those here, we are *not* full
          experts in it-- and it is worth being veeery clear about
          fine details in processing.  All TORTOISE-related questions
          about options or problems should be addressed to the FS
          gurus themselves.  Though, we are also happy to be involved
          in discussions, and any feedback on things to do differently
          would be welcomed and gladly discussed on our end.

          As noted previously, the TORTOISE folks have kindly provided
          valuable feedback and input here, so we appreciate them for
          that.

          Finally, we note that there are some differences what we do
          here and the official TORTOISE gurus' recommendations for
          the tools.  For example, they recommend loading DICOMs
          directly into TORTOISE, to deal with header information
          internally; if weird things start happening in your data,
          please consider this. (*Most importantly, again-- please
          keep looking at your data to know what is happening at each
          step along the way!*)

**A comment on running earlier versions of TORTOISE.** In the Dark
Ages TORTOISE either required an IDL license to run in batchable mode
or was run subject-by-subject by clicking through an IDL VM GUI (ick).
A PDF describing **a** system of steps for processing with TORTOISE
v2.5.2 is provided here, ":download:`Running_TORTOISE_v2.5.2.pdf
<media/old_tort_v2.5.2/Running_TORTOISE_v2.5.2.pdf>`," for the time
being, in part for the nostalgia of youth.  Earlier versions of
TORTOISE (v2.5.1 and previous) have greater subtlety in processing,
and are entirely ignored.  We don't comment any further about this
version of processing here.

|

.. _fp_preproc_tort_diffprep:

**DIFFPREP**
------------

This function is run differently depending on whether one plans to run
``DR_BUDDI`` afterwards or not.  Basically, if the DWIs have been
acquired as a dual phase encoded (AP-PA or "blip up/blip down") data
set, then you will use ``DR_BUDDI`` for EPI distortion reduction; if
not, then you won't.  Here, we *do* have AP-PA data, and so use
``DIFFPREP`` accordingly on each of the AP and PA sets.  The final
outputs of interest will be a set of motion- and eddy-distortion
reduced set of DWIs, along with *b*\-matrices that have been adjusted
for any rotations applied the volumes.

**Proc:** For pipeline simplicity and modularity, we make a separate
working directory for the ``DIFFPREP`` inputs, because some
reformatting is necessary, and this directory (``$odir``) will also
hold the processed files. Essentially the same steps are applied to
each of the AP and PA sets, creating two separate directories.

The main inputs (volume + gradient info) can be provided to
``DIFFPREP`` in two different formats: either via a listfile, or as
command line arguments. We use the latter here, which means we need to
make separate row-wise files of the *b*\-values and (unscaled)
*b*\-vector gradients; this is accomplished with a single call to
``1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++``.  The NIFTI volume of DWIs must be unzipped,
accomplished during the ``3dcopy`` step.  The reference anatomical
merely gets uncompressed (once, since the same volume is used in both
the AP and PA processing).

For ``DIFFPREP`` itself, most of the inputs are fairly
self-explanatory.  Note that we flag that we will be following this
processing with ``DR_BUDDI`` (via ``--will_be_drbuddied 1``). We also
note that the phase-encode direction was along the A-P axis of the
volume (that is what ``--phase vertical`` signifies). Finally, we just
use the default settings file from the TORTOISE folks (via
``--reg_settings *.dmc``; note that this text file should be sitting
in a directory with the following location and name:
``$HOME/DIFF_PREP_WORK/``).  For the AP data set, we then execute::

    # I/O path, same as above, following earlier steps
    set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

    # make a directory to hold 'starter' data for DIFFPREP, as well
    # as all the files it creates
    set odir = "$path_P_ss/dwi_03_ap"
    if ( ! -e $odir ) then
        mkdir $odir
    endif

    # uncompress the anatomical
    gunzip $path_P_ss/anat_01/t2w.nii.gz

    # for DIFFPREP command line, need row-vec and row-bval format
    1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++                                      \
        -in_col_matT      $path_P_ss/dwi_02/ap_matT.dat    \
        -unit_mag_out                                      \
        -out_row_vec      $odir/ap_rvec.dat                \
        -out_row_bval_sep $odir/ap_bval.dat

    # the NIFTI file must be unzipped
    3dcopy                                                 \
        $path_P_ss/dwi_02/ap.nii.gz                        \
        $odir/ap.nii

    # finally, the main command itself
    DIFFPREP                                               \
        --dwi         $odir/ap.nii                         \
        --bvecs       $odir/ap_rvec.dat                    \
        --bvals       $odir/ap_bval.dat                    \
        --structural  $path_P_ss/anat_01/t2w.nii           \
        --phase       vertical                             \
        --will_be_drbuddied  1                             \
        --reg_settings TORTOISE_AFNI_bootcamp_DATA_registration_settings.dmc

\.\.\. and for the PA data set, nearly the same command with "ap" ->
"pa"::

    # I/O path, same as above, following earlier steps
    set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

    # make a directory to hold 'starter' data for DIFFPREP, as well
    # as all the files it creates
    set odir = "$path_P_ss/dwi_03_pa"
    if ( ! -e $odir ) then
        mkdir $odir
    endif

    # for DIFFPREP command line, need row-vec and row-bval format
    1dDW_Grad_o_Mat++                                      \
        -in_col_matT      $path_P_ss/dwi_02/pa_matT.dat    \
        -unit_mag_out                                      \
        -out_row_vec      $odir/pa_rvec.dat                \
        -out_row_bval_sep $odir/pa_bval.dat

    # the NIFTI file must be unzipped
    3dcopy                                                 \
        $path_P_ss/dwi_02/pa.nii.gz                        \
        $odir/pa.nii

    # finally, the main command itself
    DIFFPREP                                               \
        --dwi         $odir/pa.nii                         \
        --bvecs       $odir/pa_rvec.dat                    \
        --bvals       $odir/pa_bval.dat                    \
        --structural  $path_P_ss/anat_01/t2w.nii           \
        --phase       vertical                             \
        --will_be_drbuddied  1                             \
        --reg_settings TORTOISE_AFNI_bootcamp_DATA_registration_settings.dmc

-> producing separate subdirectories 'data_proc/SUBJ_001/dwi_03_ap/' and
'data_proc/SUBJ_001/dwi_03_pa/':

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory substructure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/tort/fp_08_diffprep_appa.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output subdirectories made by TORTOISE's DIFFPREP applied
       separately to the AP and PA data sets.*

In the present set of steps, these outputs are intermediate to running
``DR_BUDDI``, and so we continue on.  Note that it would be good to
look at these outputs.

|

.. _fp_preproc_tort_drbuddi:

**DR_BUDDI**
------------

**Proc.** This step combines both the AP and PA data sets; it makes
use of the transforms calculated earlier, and will combine each with
subsequent ones calculated here and then apply them.  Therefore, the
"list" files of the data processed by ``DIFFPREP`` are provided.  The
same anatomical reference volume is also used.

run::

    # I/O path, same as above, following earlier steps
    set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

    DR_BUDDI_withoutGUI                                    \
        --up_data    $path_P_ss/dwi_03_ap/ap_proc.list     \
        --down_data  $path_P_ss/dwi_03_pa/pa_proc.list     \
        --structural $path_P_ss/anat_01/t2w.nii            \
        --distortion_level medium                          \
        --res              1.5 1.5 1.5                     \
        --output           $path_P_ss/dwi_04/buddi.list

-> producing a single subdirectory 'data_proc/SUBJ_001/dwi_04/'
(though some files are also added to the locations of the input
``*_proc.list`` files):

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory substructure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/tort/fp_09_tortoise_drbuddi.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output subdirectory made by TORTOISE's DR_BUDDI applied
       to the results of DIFF_PREP, combining the AP and PA sets.*

It contains the following outputs of both DWI and anatomical data
sets.  Note that the volumes can be grouped into two sets by space, 1)
ones that are in the "blip_up :math:`$b_0$`" space (which, for our
purposes, are all early/intermediate files), and 2) ones that are in
the final "structural" registration space (which are ones that we will
use).  Further note that some of the names are familiar, so
doublecheck to make sure that you are using the correct volume in your
scripts.

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80
   :stub-columns: 0

   * - Outputs of
     - TORTOISE's ``DR_BUDDI``
   * - **command.log**
     - textfile, copy of the command that was run.
   * - **blip\*.nii, deformation\*nii.gz, b0_corrected_final.nii**
     - some intermediate volumes in "blip_up :math:`b_0`" space.
   * - **structural_used.nii**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 3D (single brick volume), the reference
       anatomical in the same resolution as it was input, but in
       "blip_up :math:`b_0`" space.
   * - **structural.nii**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 3D (single brick volume), the reference
       anatomical in "structural" space, which will define the spatial
       resolution+grid as the output DWIs (i.e., it is probably
       resampled from its own original input); **not** to be confused
       with *structural_used.nii*, above.
   * - **buddi.nii**
     - volumetric NIFTI file in "structural" space, 4D (*N*\=31
       volumes), the final DWI volumes (AP and PA information combined
       into one), in which we are highly interested.
   * - **buddi.bmtxt**
     - textfile, column file of (DW scaled) TORTOISE-style *b*\-matrix
       (:math:`N\times 6`), which are also of great interest.
   * - **buddi.list**
     - textfile, list of names of final output DWI volume and
       *b*-\matrix files, as well as the phase encode direction.

.. note:: In general (at least for TORTOISE v3.0), the origin and
          orientation of the FOVs of these volumes will be different
          than what was input.  Therefore, don't expect other data
          sets to overlay on these immediately; making these volumes
          play more nicely with the other data sets is part of the
          role of later ``fat_proc`` commands.
