.. _fp_prepre_II:

Pre-preproc, II: examine and filter
=========================================

.. contents::
   :depth: 3

Overview
--------

Sometimes volumes are so corrupted by distortion (lots of dropout,
subject motion, etc.) it makes sense to remove it from the
analysis. It has to be removed from both the list of
gradient/b-matrices, as well as from the volume set.  Additionally, if
matching AP and PA (blip up/down) pairs of dsets have been acquired,
then the same volumes need to be removed from both sets.  The
``fat_proc_select_vols`` provides a wrapper for a straightforward,
user-interactive GUI (*thanks, Justin Rajendra!*) to be able to:

* view a slice of each DWI in a dset simultaneously and to click on it
  to add it to a 'bad' list that is stored in a text file;
* use multiple dsets to add to the list, so one can easily define a
  single list that is the union of 'bad' volumes;
* create an AFNI-formatted string for subbrick/list selection that can
  be applied to both volumes/gradient files;
* and keep a text-file record the applied filter, for future
  reference.

For slice viewing, I generally prefer using the sagittal view with
separate scaling per volume.  Generally, the presence of one or more
bad slices is most readily apparent in these, IMHO.

The purpose of ``fat_proc_select_vols`` is to allow a user to
select *bad* volumes that should be removed, and to automatically
generate a list of *good* volumes to keep.  The tool works by
selecting *bad* volumes because we assume that, in any given study,
there will be fewer bad volumes than good ones-- if this is not the
case, your data+study might be in big trouble!  

In AFNI, one can use "sub-brick" selectors to choose subsets of a data
set to input into a function.  For example, let's say AAA.nii.gz is a
4D data set containing 20 volumes.  If you wanted to keep only the
first ten, then you would input ``AAA.nii.gz'[0..9]'``; if you wanted
the last ten, this could be either ``AAA.nii.gz'[10..19]'`` or
``AAA.nii.gz'[10..$]'``, as the "$" is a special character meaning "to
the end of the list"; if you wanted only volumes #0-5, 8 and 16-18,
you would input ``AAA.nii.gz'[0..5,8,16..18]'``; etc.  These selectors
can also be applied to text files, selecting indices of either rows or
columns using ``BBB.txt'[0..9]'`` or ``BBB'{0..9}'``, etc.  See the
help of ``3dcalc`` for more information.

Thus, the primary output of ``fat_proc_select_vols`` is a file
containing the selector string part of those above commands, plain and
simple.  For example, in the example performed below, the whole
rigmarole with ``fat_proc_select_vols`` is to produce of file called
"dwi_sel_both_goods.txt" that contains a single line::

  0..12,14..21,23..32

\.\.\. which is the string selector of *good* volumes to keep from
each of the AP and PA dsets.  Note that that kind of simply structured
file could be made in **many** different ways-- feel free to use other
methods.  We do find value in A) users looking at and inspecting their
own data for artifacts and B) having a written record of what they
decided to filter.

.. note:: There are no brackets in the desired selector string of
          *good* volumes.  This is because the user may have either
          row or column data of gradient and *b*\-value information,
          which would require different brackets.  We deal with that
          hassle internally in the ``fat_proc_filter_dwis`` function
          so that the user doesn't have to.  You're welcome.

The ``fat_proc_filter_dwis`` function applies the AFNI-formatted
selector string from ``fat_proc_select_vols`` (or, from any source,
actually) to input volume and gradient files.  Yup, that's it.

|

.. _fp_select_vols:

**fat_proc_select_vols**: GUI to select baddies (and make good list)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

.. note:: In this example dset, there aren't actually obviously bad
          volumes. One would normally look for signs of data corrupted
          by within-TR subject motion, etc.  Here, "bad" volumes are
          just selected for the sake of didacticism-- *I hope you're
          happy.*

**Proc:** A paired set of *N* DWIs with opposite phase encode
directions (AP and PA); the following opens up an earlier-made set of
sagittal views of each volume, with brightness scaled separately per
slice, and one can click on bad volumes to add them to the list; then,
in the second function call, the same list is reopened and the editing
continues, since we want to form the union of bad volumes across the
AP-PA pair of dsets.  **When all is said and done here, the main thing
we will want from this is the string selector of the list of good
volumes to keep, which will be called dwi_sel_both_goods.txt**::

    # I/O path, same as before
    set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

    fat_proc_select_vols  \
        -in_dwi  $path_P_ss/dwi_00/ap.nii.gz                     \
        -in_img  $path_P_ss/dwi_00/ap_sepscl.sag.png             \
        -prefix  $path_P_ss/dwi_01/dwi_sel_ap

    fat_proc_select_vols  \
        -in_dwi  $path_P_ss/dwi_00/pa.nii.gz                     \
        -in_img  $path_P_ss/dwi_00/pa_sepscl.sag.png             \
        -in_bads $path_P_ss/dwi_01/dwi_sel_ap_bads.txt           \
        -prefix  $path_P_ss/dwi_01/dwi_sel_both

\.\.\. and during the running, the following actions were taken in
this example (again, this is just an example of applying selection in
the GUI):

#. **After the first function has started and some clicks have been made
   (described in caption):**

   .. list-table:: 
      :header-rows: 1
      :widths: 90
    
      * - Selector GUI:  having selected (and deselected) some AP vols
      * - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/fp_06_sel_vols_ap.png
             :width: 100%
             :align: center
      * - *An example of what the opened GUI looks like after the
          first function above was executed to sort through the AP
          vols, with the user having selected the volume with index 12
          and then clicked the "Bad-vol" button to add it to the list
          (as noted in the terminal); then selected the volume with
          index 13 and clicked the "Bad-vol" button to add it to the
          list (shown in terminal); and then having gone back and
          selected the volume with index 12 and clicked the "Unbad"
          button to remove it from the list (reflected in the
          terminal). After this, the user clicked "Finish", and only
          index 13 was stored in the bad list.*

   |

#. **After the first function has finished and the second function has
   just executed-- no clicks made yet:**

   .. list-table:: 
      :header-rows: 1
      :widths: 90
    
      * - Selector GUI:  initial view when about to select PA vols
      * - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/fp_06_sel_vols_pa_init.png
             :width: 100%
             :align: center
      * - *Now, when the second function was executed above, the set
          of PA volume images is opened, and it can be see in the
          terminal that there is already the index "13" in the
          "volumes selected" list, because the prior list of bads was
          read in during the function call.  Nothing has been clicked
          on yet in the GUI.*

   |

#. **After some clicks have been made during the execution of the second
   function:**

   .. list-table:: 
      :header-rows: 1
      :widths: 90
    
      * - Selector GUI:  final view after adding to "bad" list
      * - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/fp_06_sel_vols_pa_final.png
             :width: 100%
             :align: center
      * - *Now, continuing to navigate the PA volumes, the user has
          selected the volume with index 22 and clicked "Bad-vol",
          adding it to the already-started list.  After this, the user
          clicked "Finish".*

   |

-> produces one new directory in 'data_proc/SUBJ_001/', called
"dwi_01/":

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory structure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/fp_06_sel_vols_dir.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output files made by calls to fat_proc_select_vols commands
       for both the AP and PA data.*

It contains the following outputs for the AP data, and analogous
outputs for the PA (="both") dsets, *but we also note that the
"dwi_sel_both_goods.txt" file contains the complement of the union of
'bad' selections from both the AP and PA selection*, and therefore the
the PA (="both") images have fewer volumes here.

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80
   :stub-columns: 0

   * - Outputs of
     - ``fat_proc_select_vols``
   * - **dwi_sel_ap_cmd.txt**
     - textfile, copy of the command that was run, and location
   * - **dwi_sel_ap_bads.txt**
     - textfile, list of the *bad* volumes selected, *here containing
       the union of bad volumes selected because it was read back in
       to the second function*
   * - **dwi_sel_ap_goods.txt**
     - textfile, selector string of the *good* volumes, made as the
       complementary set from *the initial* dwi_sel_ap_bads.txt
   * - **dwi_sel_ap_onescl.\*.png**
     - autoimages, one slice per DWI volume, with single scaling
       across all volumes, of what would be the new *good* volumes in
       dwi_sel_ap_goods.txt, if the filter string were applied (to the
       AP set)
   * - 
     - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/dwi_sel_ap_onescl.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - **dwi_sel_ap_sepscl.\*.png**
     - autoimages, one slice per DWI volume, with separate scalings
       for each volume; of what would be the new *good* volumes in
       dwi_sel_ap_goods.txt, if the filter string were applied (to the
       AP set)
   * - 
     - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/dwi_sel_ap_sepscl.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - **dwi_sel_both_cmd.txt**
     - textfile, copy of the command that was run, and location
   * - **dwi_sel_both_bads.txt**
     - does not exist, because the dwi_sel_ap_bads.txt file was
       read in again and added to!
   * - **dwi_sel_both_goods.txt**
     - textfile, selector string of the *good* volumes, made as the
       complementary set from dwi_sel_both_bads.txt
   * - **dwi_sel_both_onescl.\*.png**
     - autoimages, one slice per DWI volume, with single scaling
       across all volumes, of what would be the new *good* volumes in
       dwi_sel_both_goods.txt, if the filter string were applied (to
       the PA set)
   * -
     - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/dwi_sel_both_onescl.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - **dwi_sel_both_sepscl.\*.png**
     - autoimages, one slice per DWI volume, with separate scalings
       for each volume; of what would be the new *good* volumes in
       dwi_sel_both_goods.txt, if the filter string were applied (to
       the PA set)
   * -
     - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/dwi_sel_both_sepscl.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center

|

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Text files: "good" and "bad" files
   * - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/fp_06_sel_vol_str_files.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output text files after both fat_proc_select_vols commands for
       both the AP and PA data-- note that some of this may be
       counterintuitive. Mainly, the dwi_sel_both_goods.txt files is
       the important output to be used later.*

|

.. _fp_filter_dwis:

**fat_proc_filter_dwis**: apply selection filter to keep goodies
------------------------------------------------------

Once the string of "good" values to keep in the data set has been made
and stored in a simple text file, it can be applied to both a 4D DWI
file and some form of the gradient information.  For the latter, here
we choose to use the TORTOISE-style *b*\-matrix, which contains both
the gradient and DW *b*\-value information, because we aim to use
TORTOISE's DIFFPREP in the subsequent step of DWI processing.   

**Proc:** the filter function will be applied to each of the AP and PA
dsets individually, though using the same "selection string" in both
cases.  Note that the input volumes and *b*\-matrices are in the
"data_proc/SUBJ_001/dwi_00/" directory, while the selection string is
in the "data_proc/SUBJ_001/dwi_01/" directory::

    # I/O path, same as before
    set path_P_ss = data_proc/SUBJ_001

    # the string of *good* volumes after selecting *bads*
    set selstr = `cat $path_P_ss/dwi_01/dwi_sel_both_goods.txt`

    # filter from both AP and PA dwi sets, both vols and b-matrices
    fat_proc_filter_dwis                                 \
        -in_dwi        $path_P_ss/dwi_00/ap.nii.gz       \
        -in_col_matT   $path_P_ss/dwi_00/ap_matT.dat     \
        -select        "$selstr"                         \
        -prefix        $path_P_ss/dwi_02/ap

    fat_proc_filter_dwis                                 \
        -in_dwi        $path_P_ss/dwi_00/pa.nii.gz       \
        -in_col_matT   $path_P_ss/dwi_00/pa_matT.dat     \
        -select        "$selstr"                         \
        -prefix        $path_P_ss/dwi_02/pa

-> produces one new directory in 'data_proc/SUBJ_001/', called
"dwi_02/":

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 90

   * - Directory structure for example data set
   * - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/fp_07_filter_dwis.png
          :width: 100%
          :align: center
   * - *Output files made by calls to fat_proc_filter_dwis commands
       for both the AP and PA data.*

It contains the following outputs for the AP data (and analogous
outputs for the PA sets):

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80
   :stub-columns: 0

   * - Outputs of
     - ``fat_proc_filter_dwis``
   * - **ap_cmd.txt**
     - textfile, copy of the command that was run, and location
   * - **ap.nii.gz**
     - volumetric NIFTI file, 4D (*M*\=31 volumes)
   * - **ap_matT.dat**
     - textfile, column file of (DW scaled) TORTOISE-style b-matrix
       (:math:`M\times 6`)
   * - **ap_onescl.\*.png**
     - autoimages, one slice per DWI volume, with single scaling
       across all volumes
   * -
     - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/ap_onescl.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
   * - **ap_sepscl.\*.png**
     - autoimages, one slice per DWI volume, with separate scalings
       for each volume
   * -
     - .. image:: media/prepre_ii/ap_sepscl.sag.png
          :width: 100%   
          :align: center
